An Inorganic Stimulator of Interferon Genes Sensitizer for the
Metalloimmunotherapy of Intracellular Bacterial Infections
Chuang Yang,⊥Nannan Zheng,⊥Yao Luo,⊥Yujie Hu, Wanbo Zhu, Qiaojie Wang, Jin Tang,
Jiaxing Wang,* Xijian Liu,* Hao Shen,* and Xianlong Zhang*
Cite This: ACS Nano 2026, 20, 10090−10107
Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
Article Recommendations
*
sı
Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Bone infections associated with the formation of intracellular bacterial niches
in macrophages and bone cells play an important role in the long-lasting nature of chronic
infections. One major mechanism of intracellular bacterial persistence lies in the low
antibiotic permeability and subverted immune responses. It is now increasingly apparent that
metal elements such as Mn, Zn, and Se exploit the stimulator of interferon genes (STING)
pathway in immune cells to combat invading pathogens and intrinsic aberrant cells. Here, we
report a prototype of bacterial metalloimmunotherapy using a synthetic inorganic STING
sensitizer (SSZ), which comprises Se-loaded mesoporous silica nanoparticles and ZnO
quantum dot lids. Mechanistically, the inorganic STING sensitizer could restore the
bactericidal activity of lysosomes in macrophages and generate type I interferons, achieving
effective intracellular bacterial clearance. Topical application of the inorganic STING
sensitizer initiated robust antibacterial immunity, leading to obvious therapeutic efficacy
toward both intracellular bacteria and biofilms in a mouse osteomyelitis model.
Rechallenging the SSZ-cured mice with bacteria led to effective inhibition of bacterial growth, suggesting the generation of long-
term antibacterial memory responses. This antibacterial strategy was also proven effective in a rabbit knee prosthetic infection model.
Overall, the inorganic STING sensitizer offers an alternative approach for intracellular bacterial treatments, and this underscores the
great potential of metalloimmunotherapy for infectious diseases.
KEYWORDS: intracellular bacteria, biofilm, implant infection, immunotherapy, STING sensitizer
■INTRODUCTION
Our current repertoire of antibiotics for infections is not
capable of effectively treating all bone-related infections. One
contributing factor is that the cellular components of the bone
and immune cells can be internally infected with Staphylococcus
aureus, a leading causative bacterium of osteomyelitis.1 The
infected cells shield the bacteria from a wide range of
antibiotics, including β-lactams, macrolides, vancomycin, and
aminoglycosides, by hindering antibiotic entrance.2 The
intracellular bacteria can resist detrimental substances such as
reactive oxygen species (ROS) and suppress the production of
hydrolytic enzymes in lysosomes.3 Meanwhile, bacteria-
infected cells can inhibit T-cell proliferation and prime T
cells for apoptosis.4 The intracellular persistent bacteria explain
the ready recurrence of bone and joint infections even after
extensive administration of antibiotic therapy and debridement
and pose challenges in developing alternative strategies for
treating intracellular bacterial infections.
Immunotherapy is revolutionizing the treatment of a
diversity of cancers and infectious diseases and yields complete
and durable responses.5 Agonists of stimulator of interferon
genes (STING) are a promising class of immunotherapeutics
that activate innate immunity and reinvigorate antitumor T-cell
responses.6 STING also exerts protective cellular responses to
bacterial and viral infection by triggering the synthesis of
interferons (IFNs).7 During intracellular infection of macro-
phages by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the cGAS−STING
pathway senses bacterial DNA and activates cell-intrinsic
antibacterial defenses to control intracellular M. tuberculosis
growth.8 The critical role of STING in host immune
surveillance has invigorated a fervor of investigation into
strategies to stimulate the STING pathway, such as leveraging
cGAMP and cyclic dinucleotide (CDN) STING agonists.9
Although promising, the activity and therapeutic efficacy of
current clinically available STING agonists are limited by their
poor cellular permeability and low bioavailability to activate
the intracellularly located STING.10 Emerging evidence has
indicated the essential roles of metal elements in immune
regulation including pathogen−host interactions (Ca, Fe, Zn,
Mn, Se, and Cu),11−14 T-cell activation (Se and Ca),15,16 and
cGAS−STING signaling (Zn, Mn, and Se).17−19 We have
Received:
January 8, 2026
Revised:
March 7, 2026
Accepted:
March 9, 2026
Published: March 17, 2026
Article
www.acsnano.org
© 2026 American Chemical Society
10090
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6c00422
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 10090−10107
Downloaded via QINGDAO UNIV SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY on June 25, 2026 at 03:22:15 (UTC).
See https://pubs.acs.org/sharingguidelines for options on how to legitimately share published articles.

previously reported the application of MnPSe3 NPs13 and
ZNO NPs20 for the immunotherapy of mice subcutaneous
implant infections, but the immunomodulatory role of metal
elements in intracellular bacterial infectious diseases, such as
osteomyelitis, has not been studied.
Here, we have developed a metalloimmunotherapy based on
STING pathway regulation as an alternative form of
intracellular bacterial immunotherapy (Scheme 1). Briefly,
Se@SiO2 nanoparticles (SS NPs) are sealed by acid-
decomposable ZnO quantum dots that disassemble in
response to biofilm acidification to prevent premature drug
release. We hypothesized that the synthesized Se@SiO2@ZnO
(SSZ) NPs could facilitate both extracellular and intracellular
bacterial clearance by the antibacterial effect of ZnO and the
immunostimulatory role of the released Se NPs and Zn2+. We
defined the STING-activating potential of SSZ and the
intracellular bacterial clearance effect induced by lysosome
function restoration in MRSA (methicillin-resistant S. aureus)-
infected macrophages. Moreover, we validated that SSZ
induces a “hot” T-cell-inflamed immune response in the
poorly immunogenic murine osteomyelitis model and yields a
better therapeutic efficacy in eliminating intracellular bacteria
and biofilm than traditional antibiotics. We further demon-
strate the translational potential of SSZ NPs as a surgical
adjuvant to prevent infection recurrence by eliciting long-term
memory immunity. The translational potential of the
antibacterial strategy was also verified using large animal
models, i.e., a rabbit knee periprosthetic joint infection (PJI)
model.
■RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Construction of Se@SiO2@ZnO (SSZ) NPs
We have done extensive research studies on the biological
functions of Se@SiO2(SS) NPs, including the area of tumor,21
kidney injury,22 diabetic retinopathy,23 and inflammatory
osteolysis.24 Besides, the immunomodulatory role of Se
element has been proven by several laboratories.15,19 But
burst release of Se element may pose detrimental role on the
host immunity.25 Here, we proposed a ZnO capping strategy
to seal Se elements in porous SiO2, thereby realizing infectious
microenvironment-responsive release of Zn2+ and Se NPs. In
addition, ZnO endows the nanoparticle with direct anti-
bacterial functions. The synthetic process for Se@SiO2@ZnO
(SSZ) NPs is shown in Figure 1a. First, Se@SiO2 nanospheres
were prepared in a reverse microemulsion system according to
the method previously reported.26 Transmission electron
microscopy (TEM) images showed that the prepared Se@
SiO2 nanospheres have a uniform morphology with an average
diameter of about 60 nm, and a large number of Se small
particles are distributed in the SiO2 shell (Figures 1b and S1a).
Subsequently, Zn(Ac)2 formed ZnO quantum dots on the
outside of the SiO2 shell under alkaline conditions, which
blocked the mesoporous hole created by etching. Compared
with Se@SiO2 nanospheres, a large number of small particles
Scheme 1. Inorganic STING Agonist for the Metalloimmunotherapy of Intracellular Bacterial Infectionsa
aSSZ releases Se NPs and Zn2+ in the acidic biofilm microenvironment and then augments bacterial DNA-induced STING activation. STING
signaling leads to the expression of genes for proinflammatory cytokines and activates transcription of type I interferon genes. The activated
bacterial lysis enzymes in phagolysosomes decompose the intracellular bacteria, and then the macrophage presents bacterial antigens to stimulate
the maturation of CD8+ T cells. The effector CD8+ T cells detect and eliminate bacteria-infected bone cells by releasing cytotoxic substances such
as perforin and granzyme B.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6c00422
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 10090−10107
10091

representing ZnO quantum dots can be observed around the
SiO2 shell (Figures 1c, S1b, and S2). It can be clearly seen
from Figure S3 that many quantum dots with irregular shapes
(circled in yellow in Figure S3a) were scattered in the middle
of the silica shell, and most of them were smaller than 5 nm in
size. Their facet spacing is ∼0.203 nm, which corresponds to
the spacing of the crystal faces of the Se crystal (102) (Figure
S3b), which further proves that the quantum dots encapsulated
in silica are selenium particles. Similarly, within the SSZ NPs,
we observed that irregularly shaped quantum dots were
distributed on the exterior of the silica shell (highlighted in
red in Figure S3c), with most of the quantum dots measuring
less than 5 nm. The lattice of these quantum dots was much
more pronounced with a facet spacing of ∼0.257 nm in ZnO
(JCPDS 21-1486) (Figure S3d). The energy dispersive
spectrometry (EDS) elemental mapping displayed a homoge-
neous distribution of Se, Si, O, and Zn elements in Se@SiO2@
ZnO nanoparticles (NPs) (Figure 1d). The X-ray diffraction
(XRD) pattern (Figure 1e) not only showed the corresponding
peaks of Se NPs (JCPDS card no. 06-0362) but also illustrated
the extra diffraction peaks arising from ZnO (JCPDS card no.
21-1486). The results presented above demonstrate the
successful synthesis of Se@SiO2@ZnO NPs. The Se@SiO2@
ZnO NPs exhibited good monodispersity with an average
hydrated particle size of about 150 nm (Figure 1f). From the
Brunauer−Emmett−Teller (BET) characterization, Se@
SiO2@ZnO NPs have a uniform mesoporous structure with
a pore size of 2.5 nm (Figure 1g). The calculated mesoporous
surface area and volume are 20 m2 g−1 and 0.06 cm3 g−1,
respectively (Figure 1h). We used an inductively coupled
plasma-optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES) to detect the
loading rate of Se and Zn in SSZ nanoparticles. The results of
ICP-OES indicated that the Se and Zn loadings in SSZ
nanoparticles were 13.7 and 3.8 wt %, respectively.
Figure 1. Characterization of SSZ nanoparticles (NPs). (a) The preparation process of SSZ NPs. (b, c) TEM images of SS and SSZ NPs. (d)
STEM image of SSZ NPs, the corresponding elemental mapping of Si, O, Se, and Zn. (e) Powder X-ray diffractions (XRD) patterns of SSZ NPs
(Se: JCPDS card no. 06−0362; ZnO: JCPDS card no. 21−1486). (f) Hydrate particle size of SSZ NPs. (g) Pore size distribution of SSZ NPs. (h)
N2 absorption−desorption isotherm of SSZ NPs. (i) TEM images of SSZ NPs after stirring in PBS (pH 6.5 and 7.4) for different times. Scale bar =
20 nm. (j) The release of Se in different conditions (pH 6.5 and 7.4). (k) The degradation diagram of SSZ NPs.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6c00422
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 10090−10107
10092

Next, the release of Zn2+ and Se NPs under the stimulated
infectious microenvironment was investigated. As shown in
Figure 1i, in a weakly acidic environment (pH 6.5), the capped
ZnO nanodots on the SiO2 shell gradually dissolve, while the
structure changes of the SSZ NPs under neutral conditions
(pH 7.4) are negligible. This may be due to the fact that at
lower pH conditions, excessive H+ directly decomposes the
surface of ZnO NPs, making ZnO NPs dissolve more easily in
aqueous solution27 and thus promoting the degradation of
ZnO capping. We used inductively coupled plasma-mass
spectrometry (ICP-MS) to assess the release level of ZnO. As
can be seen from Figure S4, the SSZ materials release about
70% ZnO within 48 h under acidic conditions (pH 6.5) and
about 5% under neutral conditions (pH 7.4), which can
achieve the infectious microenvironment-responsive release of
Zn2+. Moreover, due to the gradual degradation of ZnO under
acidic conditions, the mesoporous pores of SiO2 were exposed,
and the internal Se NPs were gradually released (Figure 1j),
which can achieve the infectious microenvironment-responsive
release of Zn2+ and Se NPs. The degradation and release
processes are shown in Figure 1k.
Before biomedical applications, we tested the colloidal
stability and surface charges of the SSZ NPs. SSZ NPs were
dispersed in H2O, PBS, and DMEM for 2 days, and the
dynamic light distribution (DLS) was measured at different
time points. As shown in Figure S5a, the DLS size of SSZ NPs
exhibited no significant change after incubation in various
buffers for difficult times, suggesting good stability. Moreover,
we also examined the zeta potential of the SSZ NPs in
biological media to assess their surface charge. As is depicted in
Figure S5b, SSZ NPs exhibited negative zeta potentials in
physiological conditions, which is favorable for biological
applications of SSZ NPs. To further test the long-term stability
of SSZ NPs in a simulated body fluid environment, we
measured the particle size of SSZ NPs in different solutions for
7 days (Figure S6). The particle sizes of SSZ NPs showed
negligible changes over a 7-day observation, indicating the
stability of this system.
The biosafety of the SSZ NPs was tested with MC3T3-E1
osteoblast precursor cells, RAW 264.7 cells, and L929 cells. As
shown in Figure S7, SSZ NPs at a concentration of 100 μg
mL−1 did not influence the cell viability of tested cells,
indicating the good biosafety of the nanosystem.
SSZs Demonstrate Antimicrobial Activity against
Planktonic Bacteria and Established Biofilm
The antibacterial effect of Zn element is well documented,28 so
we conducted a series of studies in vitro to assess the
effectiveness of SSZ NPs against both planktonic bacteria and
Figure 2. SSZ NPs modify bacterial membrane integrity and induce disruption of established biofilms. (a) TEM images, (b) flow cytometry
analysis, and (c) planktonic bacterial CFU counts of bacterial cells by SS or SSZ NPs treatment (20 μg mL−1), alongside untreated and antibiotic
(20 μg mL−1 vancomycin or levofloxacin) controls. Red arrows indicate SSZ NPs. (d) Biofilm CFU count, (e) CLSM images, and (f) SEM images
of 24-h grown biofilms treated with SS or SSZ NPs (20 μg mL−1) for another 24 h, alongside untreated antibiotic (20 μg mL−1 vancomycin or
levofloxacin) controls. S. aureus were pseudocolored yellow, and E. coli were pseudocolored purple. (g) Schematic showing SSZ-induced biofilm
disruption. Statistical comparisons were made using an unpaired t-test. All results are shown as means ± SD. Ant, antibiotic.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6c00422
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 10090−10107
10093

biofilms in typical Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacterial
strains. The effect of SSZ on killing planktonic bacteria was
first studied with a Bio-TEM. SSZ NPs localize at the
periphery of bacterial cell walls and cause the rupture of the
bacterial cell wall and membrane (Figure 2a). The permeability
of the bacterial cell walls was further tested with flow
cytometry analysis. SSZ-treated bacteria showed a significant
increase in the proportion of PI+ cells, compared with
antibiotic treatments, suggesting an increased membrane
permeability elicited by SSZ NPs (Figure 2b). We observed
a nearly 2-log reduction for S. aureus and Escherichia coli (E.
coli) in the presence of SSZ NPs compared with bacteria grown
in the absence of additives. Notably, SSZ treatment led to
nearly 0.5-log reduction for planktonic bacteria, compared with
conventional antibiotics (Figures 2c and S8a). The presence of
a biofilm is a major factor that contributes to the treatment
failure of conventional antibiotics.29 We therefore further
studied the ability of SSZ to disrupt established bacterial
Figure 3. SSZ treatment boosts intracellular bacterial clearance of macrophages through activating STING. (a) Representative TEM images and
(b) intracellular bacterial count of MRSA-infected macrophages treated with biofilm-conditioned media supplemented with SS or SSZ NPs or
rifampicin (Rif) controls. Red arrows indicate intracellular bacteria. The irregular blue circles indicate phagolysosomes. (c) Immunofluorescence
staining and (d) flow cytometry analysis of polarization states of macrophages treated with SS or SSZ NPs (20 μg mL−1) for 24 h, alongside
untreated antibiotic (20 μg mL−1 rifampicin) controls. (e) IFNβ release from macrophages (24-h treatment with SS or SSZ NPs) compared to the
vehicle or antibiotic controls, measured by ELISA of cell culture supernatants (n = 3). (f) Representative immunofluorescence images of pSTING
protein expression of macrophages with different treatments. (g) Western blot analysis of pIRF3 protein expression of macrophages treated with
control or SSZ NPs. (h) Intracellular bacteria count and IFNβ ELISA showed that administration of C-176, a STING inhibitor, elevated
intracellular bacterial load and reduced IFNβ release in macrophages compared with SSZ-treated controls. (i) Schematic of SSZ-induced
intracellular bacterial clearance. Data shown as means ± SD. Statistical comparisons were made using t-tests. BCM, biofilm-conditioned media.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6c00422
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 10090−10107
10094

biofilms. The CFU count of the viable biofilm revealed a
significant reduction in the biofilm viability of both S. aureus
and E. coli after SSZ treatment, compared with traditional
antibiotics (Figures 2d and S8b). We further compared the
antibacterial efficacy of SSZ NPs against the MRSA biofilm
with combined antibiotics (vancomycin combined with
rifampin). SSZ demonstrated better antibacterial efficacy
than combined antibiotics against MRSA biofilms (Figure
S9). CLSM and SEM observations demonstrated obvious
disruption of biofilm integrity and reduction of S. aureus
biofilm biovolume after SSZ treatment. Besides, nearly no
viable S. aureus biofilm remained apparent upon SSZ
treatment, compared to a large proportion of viable bacteria
for vancomycin. Similarly, treatment of the E. coli biofilm with
SSZ showed a more disrupted biofilm structure and deformed
bacterial cell walls (Figures 2e,f and S10). These results
demonstrated the antibacterial potency of SSZ against both
planktonic bacteria and biofilms (Figure 2g).
SSZs Induce Host Defense against Intracellular Bacteria in
Macrophages in a STING-Dependent Way
A major function of macrophages is to digest intracellular
bacteria in acidified phagosomes by producing degradative
enzymes such as lysozymes, proteases, and nucleases.30
Figure 4. SSZ treatment promotes expression of STING downstream lysosome enzyme genes in RAW 264.7 macrophages. (a) Volcano plots of the
changes in gene expression between macrophages treated with PBS and SSZ. (b) Top-ranking biological pathway terms from KEGG pathway
enrichment analysis. (c) Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) of the top-ranking lysosome signaling pathway. NES, normalized enrichment score.
(d) Heat map of normalized gene expression represented by z scores for macrophages treated with PBS or SSZ in the lysosome signaling pathway.
(e) Schematic of SSZ-induced activation of STING downstream proinflammatory immune pathways.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6c00422
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 10090−10107
10095

Figure 5. SSZ-directed intracellular bacterial clearance in a murine model of osteomyelitis is associated with STING activation and increased CD8+
CTL infiltration. (a) Treatment scheme of orthotopic MRSA osteomyelitis models. Bacteria-contaminated implant-bearing mice were treated with
intra-articular injection of 20 mg kg−1 SS NPs or SSZ NPs at days 7, 8, and 9 after bacterial inoculation. For antibiotic control (denoted as Ant),
mice were received vancomycin (20 mg/kg per day intra-articular injection) in combination with rifampin at 15 mg/kg per day (oral
administration) at days 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12. The infected legs were dissected on day 28. (b) Representative images of dissected infected legs. Red
circles indicate purulent exudate from the knee joint. (c) Colony numbers of viable bacteria in infected femurs and the extracted implants from
mice after different treatments on day 28 (n = 5 mice per group). (d) Giemsa staining of infected femur tissues at day 28 demonstrating superior
bacterial eradication with SSZ treatment. Black arrows indicate intracellular bacteria. (e) Representative Bio-TEM images of the dissected femurs of
mice treated with SSZ NPs or the combined use of vancomycin and rifampicin. Red arrows indicate intracellular bacteria. (f, g) Representative flow
cytometry plots of M1-phenotype macrophages (CD80+CD206−) by gating on CD11b+ cells (f), and CTL (CD8+CD3+) by gating on CD45+ cells
(g) in the dissected femurs of mice after various treatments. (h) Representative fluorescent micrographs of femur tissues after granzyme (red),
perforin (green), and DAPI staining. (i) Representative fluorescent micrographs of pSTING (red) expression in CD11b+ (red) macrophages in
femur (blue) tissues for PBS-, SS-, antibiotic-, and SSZ-treated mice.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6c00422
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 10090−10107
10096

However, the S. aureus biofilm in the osteomyelitis micro-
environment significantly impaired the capacity of bactericidal
and proinflammatory responses of macrophages.31 To evaluate
the relative efficacy of SSZ NPs to kill intracellular bacteria, we
used a cell-permeable antibiotic, rifampin, as a positive control.
We treated MRSA-infected macrophages with biofilm-con-
ditioned media supplemented with SS NPs, SSZ NPs, or
rifampicin (Rif). Bio-TEM revealed an obvious reduction in
the density of intracellular S. aureus of macrophages treated
with SSZ NPs or rifampicin. Notably, we observed that the
bacteria were contained in the phagolysosome of the
macrophage treated with SS or SSZ NPS, and a blurred
bacterial cell wall was observed in the SSZ group, indicating
bacterial damage. On the contrary, the bacteria escaped from
the phagosome of the macrophage and disrupted the normal
cell structures in the control and Rif group (Figure 3a). This
result suggests that the antibacterial effect of SSZ is at least
partially mediated by the activation of the lysosome function.
Further, the infected macrophages were lysed, and the
supernatant was collected for the spread plate assay. SSZ
NPs demonstrated significantly better efficacy of intracellular
eradication, with almost 0.5-log reduction in CFU compared to
rifampicin treatment (Figure 3b). The gene expression
heterogeneity in infected macrophages provides diverse
environments for bacteria to either persist below the radar of
intracellular immune surveillance quietly or exploit their host
for rapid proliferation.32 Therefore, we tested the phenotypic
changes of macrophages under different stimulations. SSZ-
treated macrophages had elevated expression of M1-phenotype
biomarkers, such as iNOS and CCR7, and decreased
expression of M2 phenotype biomarkers, such as CD206,
compared with the vehicle and antibiotic control groups
(Figures 3c,d and S11). It is reported that both Se and Zn can
act as STING agonists to enhance proinflammatory
responses.18,19 STING activation contributes to host defense
against intracellular bacteria by promoting the fusion of
bacteria-containing phagosomes with lysosomal compart-
ments.33 Therefore, we hypothesized that the immunostimu-
latory role of SSZ is mediated by the STING pathway. The
induction of IFNβ secretion was used to assess the activation
of the cGAS−STING pathway.34 The macrophages produced
higher levels of IFNβ when stimulated with SSZ, compared
with those with rifampicin (Figure 3e). Besides, we tested the
activation of the STING pathway by evaluating the
phosphorylation state of the STING protein. We observed a
greater level of pSTING fluorescence intensity in the
macrophages stimulated with SSZ, compared with rifampicin
(Figures 3f and S12). To explore the effects of SSZ-mediated
STING activation, we analyzed the IRF3 phosphorylation in
macrophages. Compared with the control group, SSZ NPs
induced stronger phosphorylation of IRF3 in macrophages
(Figures 3g and S13). These results suggest that SSZ NPs can
activate the cGAS−STING pathway. To further explore
whether the enhanced intracellular bacterial killing effect of
SSZ is mediated by the cGAS−STING pathway, we
investigated the effect of STING inhibition on macrophage
activation. C-176, a specific STING inhibitor,35 ameliorated
SSZ-induced release of IFNβ and impaired SSZ-induced
intracellular bacterial clearance (Figure 3h). These findings
indicated that the STING pathway participates at least in part
in SSZ-mediated macrophage anti-intracellular bacterial
responses, and SSZ acts as a STING sensitizer for the
immunotherapy of intracellular infection. The immunomodu-
latory role of SSZ NPs is shown in Figure 3i.
SSZ Therapy Correlates with Enhanced STING
Downstream Inflammatory Transcription Programs
Given the STING-activating role of SSZ, we performed RNA-
seq analysis on the macrophages treated with SSZ or PBS to
determine the STING downstream gene transcription changes.
The differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between the two
groups are shown in Figure 4a. STING activation and
subsequent signal transduction are best understood for its
capacity to trigger IRF3 phosphorylation, which drives the
IFN-I immune responses. STING activation also triggers NF-
κB pathway activation and induces lysosome-mediated cell
death and secondary inflammation, albeit to a lower extent
compared with the IRF−IFN-I cascades.36 We observed that
the pathways matching STING activation were most differ-
entially expressed in the phagosome, lysosome, and NF-κB
pathways between SSZ and PBS treatment (Figure 4b). We
further performed a preranked gene set enrichment analysis
(GSEA) of differentially expressed genes between macro-
phages with different treatments using the KEGG pathway
database. The top differentially regulated pathways between
SSZ- and PBS-treated macrophages involved antibacterial
immune processes with a prominent enrichment of lysosome
and NF-κB signaling pathways (Figures 4c and S14a). We
further mined the gene expression data in the lysosome and
NF-κB pathways. We observed that genes that encode
lysosome enzymes, such as Ctsb, Ctsd, Ctsh, and Ctsk, are
upregulated in the macrophages treated with SSZ. Proin-
flammatory genes such as CCL4 and TNF in the NF-κB
pathway were also upregulated after SSZ treatment (Figures 4d
and S14b). The upregulation of lysosome enzymes explained
the enhanced lysosome-mediated trapping and killing of the
intracellular bacteria. The immunomodulatory pathway of the
SSZ NPs in macrophages is shown in Figure 4e.
SSZs Activate STING and License CTL to Clear Intracellular
Bacteria In Vivo
In light of the promising in vitro antibiofilm and
immunomodulatory activity of SSZ, it was advanced into a
murine model of osteomyelitis that closely mimics human
bone implant infections. Rifampin-based combinational anti-
biotic therapy is recommended by the Infectious Diseases
Society of America (IDSA) for the management of staph-
ylococcal implant-associated infections.37,38 Therefore, we
compared the in vivo antibacterial effect of SSZ with that of
a combination of vancomycin and rifampin (Figure 5a). On
day 28, infection is evident in the mice treated with PBS and
SS NPs, characterized by purulent exudate from the knee joint.
A reduction in the abscess area is evident after antibiotic
treatments, and SSZ treatment results in a thorough resolution
of infection compared with antibiotic treatment (Figure 5b).
Differences in the microbiological analysis were also evident;
SSZ NPs demonstrated significantly better efficacy to a
combination of vancomycin and rifampin at a lower dose,
with almost 2-log reduction in CFU compared to PBS
treatment (Figure 5c). Histological analysis demonstrated
obvious staphylococcal abscess communities (Figure S15a)
and intracellular bacterial persistence in both osteoblasts and
the immune cells of the mice treated with PBS or SS NPs
(Figure 5d). The area of staphylococcal abscess communities is
evidently smaller in the mice treated with the antibiotic and
SSZ NPs (Figure S15a). Notably, SSZ showed clear superiority
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6c00422
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 10090−10107
10097

to a combination of vancomycin and rifampin, even at lower
treatment doses and duration, in eradicating the intracellular
bacteria in the osteoblasts and the immune cells (Figure 5d).
Bio-TEM further evidenced the superior intracellular bacterial
clearance effect of SSZ, compared with antibiotic treatments
(Figure 5e). We next sought to explore whether the
intracellular eradication effect of SSZ is associated with the
alteration of immune cell composition and function. To this
Figure 6. Administration of SSZ induces long-term immune memory responses to inhibit infection recurrence. (a) Schematic of treatment regimen
in a surgical removal osteomyelitis model. The infected implant was surgically removed, followed by thorough debridement of infected tissues at
day 14 after bacterial inoculation. Post surgery, mice were treated with intra-articular injection of 20 mg kg−1 SS NPs or SSZ NPs at days 15, 16,
and 17. For antibiotic control, mice received vancomycin (20 mg/kg per day intra-articular injection) in combination with rifampin at 15 mg/kg
per day (Oral administration) at days 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, and 20. The mice were rechallenged with MRSA at day 60 after bacterial inoculation. The
infected femur was isolated 30 days after bacterial rechallenge. (b) Representative images of dissected infected legs. Black circles indicate purulent
exudate from the infected femur. (c, d) Colony numbers of viable bacteria in infected femurs and the extracted implants 30 days after bacterial
rechallenge (n = 5 mice per group). (e) Gram and Giemsa staining of infected femur tissues 30 days after bacterial rechallenge. Red arrows indicate
staphylococcal abscess communities. Black arrows indicate intracellular bacteria. (f) Representative Bio-TEM images of the dissected femurs of
mice treated with SSZ NPs or the combined use of vancomycin and rifampicin. Red arrows indicate intracellular bacteria. (g) Representative
fluorescent micrographs of femur tissues after granzyme (red), CD8 (green), and DAPI staining. (h, i) Representative flow cytometry plots of
central memory T cells (CD44highCD62L+) by gating on CD3+CD4+ cells (h) and CD3+CD8+ cells (i) in the dissected femurs of mice after various
treatments.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6c00422
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 10090−10107
10098

end, we first analyzed the macrophage phenotypic changes in
the bone marrow of mice that received different treatments.
Significantly higher levels of CD80+CD206−M1-like macro-
phages were detected in the bone marrow of SSZ-treated mice,
compared with the mice that received IDSA-recommended
antibiotic combination treatments (Figures 5f and S15b).
Robust CD8+ immunity is essential for intracellular bacterial
clearance but is often compromised in osteomyelitis. Flow
cytometry analysis showed that a higher percentage of
cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) is induced in the bone
marrow of mice receiving SSZ treatment, compared with the
mice treated with antibiotics (Figures 5g and S15c). To kill
intracellular bacteria, CTLs form a specialized immune synapse
with the target cell and release cytotoxic perforin and
granzymes.39 SSZ treatments significantly increased the
expression levels of perforin and granzymes and preferentially
accumulated at the osteoblast−bone interfaces (Figure 5h).
These results may suggest that the SSZ-activated CTLs search
for the bacteria-infected osteoblasts and osteoclasts and trigger
the release of cytotoxic substances to eradicate the intracellular
bacteria. IFNγ is another important effector molecule of
activated CTLs to eradicate bacteria.40 Administration of SSZ
resulted in an increased release of IFNγ in the bone marrow
compared with antibiotic treatment (Figure S15d). Given that
activation of STING in APCs leads to type I IFN production
and CD8+ T-cell maturation, we next tested the STING
activation level in macrophages and found a higher level of
pSTING in the macrophages after SSZ treatment (Figure 5i).
Together, these results suggested that intra-articular injection
of SSZ NPs activates STING signaling in APCs, which further
stimulates CTL maturation to release cytotoxic perforin,
granzyme, and IFNγ for intracellular bacterial clearance. To
further elucidate the antibacterial mechanism, we constructed a
mouse osteomyelitis model using STING1-KO mice. We
found that the bacterial load in mice treated with SSZ is lower
than that of the negative control group, but higher than that of
the antibiotic group (Figure S16a,b). Besides, no significant
difference was detected regarding the proportion of CD8+ T
cells among the three groups (Figure S16c,d). This result
indicates that although SSZ demonstrates a certain degree of
direct antibacterial effect, intracellular clearance of pathogens
originates from STING-dependent immune programming.
To determine whether the activated antibacterial immune
responses would lead to systemic damage, we carried out
longer-term safety evaluations, including histopathological
sections and blood tests for SSZ-treated mice. The results
showed that SSZ did not exert damage to the major organs of
mice and did not cause functional damage to the heart, liver,
and kidney (Figures S17 and 18). The results proved the
biosafety of SSZ therapy in vivo.
SSZs Trigger Potent Systemic Immune Memory Responses
to Prevent Post-Surgery Infection Recurrence
Long-term antibiotics were often applied after implant
exchange or debridement surgery for prosthetic joint infection,
which not only brings the risk of host toxicity but also leads to
the emergence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria.41 Infection
relapse occurs in 10 to 35% of patients even after multiple
surgeries and long-term antibiotic treatments.41−43 Due to the
immune-stimulatory role of SSZ NPs, we hypothesized that a
shorter treatment course of post-operative SSZ would result in
similar or better cure rates to the IDSA-recommended
rifampin-based combinational antibiotic therapy. To test this,
mice bearing infected implants underwent implant removal
and debridement surgeries 14 days after the establishment of
the osteomyelitis model. Then, the mice were treated with
intra-articular injection of 20 mg kg−1 SS NPs or SSZ NPs at
days 15, 16, and 17. For antibiotic control, mice received
vancomycin (20 mg/kg per day intra-articular injection) in
combination with rifampin at 15 mg/kg per day (oral
administration) at days 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, and 20.38 The
mice underwent new implant insertion and rechallenged with
MRSA at day 60 after bacterial inoculation. The infected femur
was isolated on day 90 (Figure 6a). On day 90, the femurs of
mice treated with PBS or SS NPs or antibiotics were
characterized by purulent exudate from the femur. An obvious
reduction in abscess area is observed after SSZ treatment,
compared to other groups (Figure 6b). Ex vivo tissue and
implant colony-forming unit (CFU) enumeration showed a
significantly reduced bacterial burden in the SSZ group,
compared to antibiotic treatments (Figure 6c,d). Histological
examination revealed complete intracellular bacterial clearance
in the mice treated with SSZ NPs, while a large number of
bacteria-infected cells are observed in the antibiotic and
control groups (Figure 6e). Bio-TEM showed that intracellular
bacteria were absent in SSZ-treated mice, while bacteria were
found in both the osteoblast and the osteocyte lacuno-
canalicular network (OLCN) of antibiotic-treated mice
(Figure 6f). Immunofluorescence staining revealed that SSZ
treatment was associated with induction of CTL responses,
with maturation and migration of CD8+ T cells into the
osteoblast lying bone beds, and expression of cytotoxic
granzyme B. On the contrary, the infiltration of CD8+ T and
expression of granzyme B in antibiotic-treated mice was even
less than in the SS-treated mice (Figure 6g). ELISA analysis
revealed a significantly higher level of IFNγ in the bone
marrow of rechallenged mice treated with SSZ than those
treated with antibiotics (Figure S19). Given the induction of
an effective CTL response upon bacterial rechallenge, we next
sought to characterize the immune memory responses elicited
by different treatments. As shown in Figures 6h,i and S20, the
percentages of both CD44hiCD62L+CD4+T cells (CD4+ Tcm)
and CD44hiCD62L+CD8+T cells (CD8+ Tcm) are significantly
higher in the bone marrow of mice treated with SSZ, compared
with mice treated with a combination of vancomycin and
rifampin. During intracellular infections, the effective gen-
eration of memory CD8+ T cells is vital for pathogen
elimination and effective vaccination. For example, eosino-
phil-deficient mice showed severely reduced memory CD8+ T-
cell responses and impaired immunity against Listeria
monocytogenes infections.44 Besides, IL-10-deficient mice
produced fewer memory CD8+ T cells and were more
susceptible to subsequent infection than wild-type mice.45
Therefore, the generation of memory CD8+ T cells is crucial
for the elimination and protection against intracellular
infections. These results suggest that post-surgery SSZ therapy
can provide long-lasting protective immunity against bacterial
rechallenge and prevent infection relapse.
SSZs Show Antibacterial Efficacy in the Rabbit Knee PJI
Model
The rabbit model is commonly used for the evaluation of
immune response and bone infection repair induced by
biomaterials. The immunological compositions and physio-
logical responses of rabbits are closer to those of humans.46,47
For instance, the rabbit osteomyelitis model is previously used
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6c00422
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 10090−10107
10099

to evaluate the antibacterial and immunomodulatory role of a
refined lubricated orthopedic implant.48 Therefore, we
established a rabbit knee periprosthetic joint infection (PJI)
model (Figure 7a) to further demonstrate the translational
relevance of the designed SSZ nanomedicine. Compared with
control groups, SSZ-treated rabbits exhibited a reduced
infection area and lesser abscess formation surrounding the
screw (Figure 7b). Ex vivo tissue and implant colony-forming
unit (CFU) enumeration showed a significantly reduced
bacterial burden in the SSZ group, compared to antibiotic
treatments (Figure 7c,e). Histological analysis of the infected
bones revealed a lower intracellular bacterial burden in the
rabbit treated with SSZ NPs, while a large number of bacteria-
infected cells are observed in the antibiotic and control groups
(Figure 7d). This result proved the universal antimicrobial
properties of the SSZ system and indicated the translational
potential of the system to tackle the clinical antibiotic-
resistance dilemma.
■CONCLUSIONS
The difficulty of treating bone and joint infections stems from
the presence of intracellular bacteria and biofilms that shield
commonly used antibiotics from penetration and reaching
sufficient concentrations for bactericidal efficacy.1 S. aureus, the
leading cause of osteomyelitis, can not only infect bone
marrow immune cells such as macrophages and neutrophils
but also reside in bone cells such as osteoblast, osteoclast, and
osteocyte.1 By selectively employing type III, type IV, type VI,
and type VII secretion systems or pore-forming toxins that
manipulate distinct aspects of host cell biology, the intracellular
bacteria can reside in phagosomes to resist acidification or
escape from the phagosome and replicate within the host cell
cytosol.30 Various biomaterials have been developed for the
treatment of infected bones by direct antibacterial effects and
immunomodulatory means, such as tobramycin-loaded multi-
functional injectable hydrogels and luteolin-delivering biode-
gradable scaffolds.49−51
Mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs) are widely used as
drug delivery carriers owing to the advantages of good
biocompatibility, adjustable pore size, large specific surface
area, high drug-loading rate, and ease of functionalization.52
MSNs have also been used previously for intracellular
infections. For example, MSNs were decorated with
triphenylphosphonium substituents and loaded with doxycy-
cline, which endowed them with affinity and bactericidal
capability toward Mycobacterium marinum within infected
Figure 7. SSZ NPs show antibacterial efficacy in the treatment of rabbit PJI. (a) Treatment scheme of rabbit MRSA osteomyelitis models. Bacteria-
contaminated implant-bearing rabbits were treated with intra-articular injection of 20 mg kg−1 SS NPs or SSZ NPs at days 7, 10, 14, and 21 after
bacterial inoculation. For antibiotic control (denoted as Ant), mice received vancomycin (20 mg/kg per day intra-articular injection) in
combination with rifampin at 15 mg/kg per day (oral administration) at days 7, 10, 14, and 21. The infected legs were dissected on day 28. (b)
Representative images of dissected infected legs. Black circles indicate the infected screws. (c) Representative images of bacterial colony-forming
units of the infected screws. (d) Gram and Giemsa staining of infected femur tissues. Black circles indicate screw insertion sites. Black arrows
indicate intracellular bacteria. (e) Colony numbers of viable bacteria in infected femurs and the extracted implants from rabbits after different
treatments on day 28 (n = 5 rabbits per group).
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6c00422
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 10090−10107
10100

THP-1 cells.53 A vancomycin-loaded K+-responsive MSN
nanosystem showed superior elimination efficiencies toward
intracellular bacteria than free drugs.54 We previously also
reported a silica-based intracellular bacteria targeting nano-
sytem, which is composed of redox-responsive degradable
disulfide bond-doped dendritic mesoporous silica and perforin
and granzyme B within the carrier.55 Therefore, these previous
studies indicate that MSNs have great potential as drug carriers
for the treatment of intracellular bacterial infections.
Considering the continuity of our research, we still used
silica-based nanoparticles to treat intracellular bacteria and
investigate immunological mechanisms.
The mechanism of the STING pathway in the control of
intracellular infection is still controversial. During M. tuber-
culosis and Legionella pneumophila infection of macrophages,
cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS), is required for activating
IFN production via the STING/TBK1 pathway and inducing
the formation of autophagosome to control bacterial growth.8
Another study reported that STING contributes to host
defense against S. aureus pneumonia by suppressing macro-
phage necroptosis.56 In the current study, we found that the
protective role of SSZ in the setting of S. aureus-infected
macrophages is dependent on STING activation. Bio-TEM
results suggest that a higher proportion of bacteria were
contained within the phagolysosome of macrophages treated
with SSZ, and an obvious bacterial damage was observed
within the phagolysosome. RNA-seq analysis reveals that SSZ
upregulates the expression of bactericidal enzymes in
phagosomes and lysosomes. These results collectively suggest
that SSZ restored the phagolysosome function of macrophages
to kill intracellular bacteria in a STING-dependent manner.
The activity and therapeutic efficacy of current clinically
available STING agonists, such as cGAMP and cyclic
dinucleotide, are limited by its poor cellular permeability,
low bioavailability, and requirement of complex and expensive
production procedures. Our proposed inorganic STING
sensitizer is stable in a physiological environment and
demonstrates high STING activation efficiency. Besides, the
synthesis procedures are simple and cheap, which is suitable
for massive production.
Bacterial biofilms prevent antibiotic penetration and
inactivate antibiotics by absorption of EPS.57,58 In addition,
biofilms frustrate macrophage activation by secreting virulence
factors and hamper the recruitment of immune cells for
bacterial clearance.59 The SSZ NPs demonstrate better
performance in eradicating mature biofilms in vitro and
eliminating biofilms in the osteomyelitis model in vivo,
compared with traditional antibiotics. Interferon (IFN)-γ-
producing CD8+ T cells play a critical role in controlling
intracellular infections.60 However, induction of T-cell-
suppressive genes by the S. aureus biofilm in bone infections
suppresses T-cell immunity.61 We found that SSZ directs the
immune cell composition into a CD8+ T-cell-rich environment,
with increased bactericidal substance release, such as perforin,
granzyme, and IFN-γ, for the detection of intracellular bacteria-
infected cells and bacterial sterilization. The CD8+ T-cell
maturation is presumed to be a result of SSZ-induced STING
amplification of downstream IFN-I immune responses. The
validation using STING1-KO mice further proved that the
SSZ-induced CD8+ T-cell maturation is dependent on STING
pathway activation.
Another drawback of antibiotics lies in a lack of elicitation of
bacterial specific immune memory responses, which contrib-
utes to bone infection recurrence after the ceasing of antibiotic
therapy.62 We demonstrate that post-surgery SSZ therapy can
provide long-lasting protective immunity against bacterial
rechallenge and prevent infection relapse, while traditional
antibiotics failed. Both in vitro and in vivo studies showed that
Se@SiO2 possesses a better immune-stimulatory effect than
the blank control, indicating the immunomodulatory role of
the Se element. The STING-activating and antibacterial effects
were further enhanced in the Se@SiO2@ZnO group,
indicating the immune synergism role of Se and Zn elements.
Zinc oxide and selenium nanoparticles are well-established
antimicrobial nanomaterials with broad-spectrum activity and
multifaceted mechanisms of action.63−65 ZnO nanoparticles
are often topically used in clinical practice for the management
of infectious wounds. Our previous study revealed that ZnO
nanoparticles could enhance the antimicrobial efficacy of
macrophages through promoting phagocytosis and secretion of
inflammatory cytokines.66 We previously revealed that the Se
element can disrupt S element metabolism in S. aureus, thereby
causing bacterial death.67 However, the immunomodulatory
mechanism of zinc oxide and selenium nanoparticles in
intracellular infection has not been studied. Our present
study demonstrated that the combination of zinc oxide and
selenium nanoparticles could restore the lysosome antibacterial
enzyme activity to clear MRSA within macrophages in a
STING pathway-dependent manner. The revelation of the
immunomodulator mechanism is important for the clinical
translation of a newly investigated nanomedicine.
According to the in vitro antibacterial and antibiofilm tests,
Se@SiO2@ZnO treatment induced a significant reduction in
planktonic bacteria and biofilm viability of both S. aureus and
E. coli, compared with Se@SiO2 treatment (Figure 2). This
result indicates that the direct antibacterial activity is mainly
mediated by ZnO within the composite structure. As for the
immunomodulatory role of the nanosystem, both Se@SiO2
and Se@SiO2@ZnO induced higher levels of IFNβ secretion
and STING phosphorylation in macrophages, compared with
the negative control and antibiotic treatment (Figure 3). This
result indicates that Se and Zn synergistically activate the
STING pathway.
In conclusion, on the one hand, SSZ played a direct
antibacterial role by the decorated ZnO within the composite
structure. On the other hand, SSZ releases Se NPs and Zn2+ in
the acidic biofilm microenvironment, which act as a sensitizer
to augment bacterial DNA-induced STING activation. STING
downstream proinflammatory responses activate bacterial lysis
enzymes in phagolysosomes to decompose the intracellular
bacteria and further amplify the maturation of CD8+ T cells to
eliminate bacteria-infected bone cells by releasing cytotoxic
substances. The inorganic STING sensitizer offers a promising
target for host-directed antibacterial immunotherapy toward
improved intracellular bacteria control and reduced infection
recurrence.
This study has some limitations, the interaction of the SSZ
nanoparticle with the host still needs comprehensive studies,
and the clinical translation of this system still needs further
exploration.
■EXPERIMENTAL SECTION
Preparation of Se@SiO2@ZnO NPs and Characterization
Se@SiO2 nanospheres were synthesized according to our previous
work.26 Then, the prepared Se@SiO2 nanospheres (0.02 g) were
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6c00422
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 10090−10107
10101

mixed with Zn(Ac)2·2H2O (0.015 g, Sinopharm Chemical Reagent
Co., Ltd.) and ethanol (32 mL), denoted as solution A. NaOH (0.06
g, Aladdin Chemical Reagent Ltd.) was evenly mixed with ethanol (13
mL), denoted as solution B. Solution A was added to solution B,
which was stirred mechanically and heated to 60 °C under ultrasound
for 1 h. After the reaction, the resulting product was washed with
ethanol thrice. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was
conducted on a JEM-2100F electron microscope at an acceleration
voltage of 200 kV (JEOL, Japan). X-ray diffraction (XRD) for
structure characterization was performed on a D/max-2550 PC X-ray
diffractometer (Rigaku, Japan). The surface area and pore-size
distribution were determined using a physical adsorption apparatus
(Micromeritics, ASAP2020) by Brunauer−Emmett−Teller (BET).
Cells and Bacteria
RAW 264.7 macrophages and MC3T3-E1 osteoblast precursor cells
were obtained from the Shanghai Institute of Cell Biology, Chinese
Academy of Science. The cells were incubated in Dulbecco’s modified
Eagle’s medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (Gibco).
Bacterial strains of S. aureus (ATCC43300) and E. coli (ATCC35218)
were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection. The
bacteria were cultured in trypticase soy broth (TSB, Solarbio, China).
Cytotoxicity
The MC3T3-E1 cells, RAW 264.7 cells, and L929 cells were cultured
in a 96-well plate with a density of 104 cells per well and incubated in
a 5% CO2 incubator at 37 °C overnight. The medium was replaced
with 200 μL of fresh medium containing different concentrations of
SSZ the next day. The cells were incubated for 24 h, and then cell
viability was determined with a CCK-8 kit per the manufacturer’s
instructions (Beyotime, China). OD450 was determined with a
microplate reader (Bio-TekELx800, USA), and the cell viability was
calculated as follows: Cell viability = (sample OD value/control OD
value) × 100%.
Antimicrobial Assays
Overnight cultures of S. aureus and E. coli were adjusted to 1 × 108
CFU/ml, and 50 μL of bacterial solution was added to 5 mL of fresh
TSB broth, allowing for 24 h growth with SS NPs (20 μg mL−1), SSZ
NPs (20 μg mL−1), or antibiotics (20 μg mL−1 vancomycin for S.
aureus, levofloxacin for E. coli). Bacterial cultures were centrifuged at
6000 rpm for 3 min, and then the precipitates were resuspended and
stained with LIVE/DEAD BacLight stain for 15 min in the dark,
washed with PBS thrice, and analyzed with a flow cytometer (LSR
Fortessa, BD Biosciences). For Bio-TEM analysis, the bacterial
precipitates were fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde for 2 h and then
transferred to aqueous OsO4 for fixation for another 2 h. The
solutions were then dehydrated with gradient ethanol solutions,
followed by embedding with acetone and resin for 2 days at 60 °C. A
Leica UC7 microtome was used to make slices, followed by staining
with uranyl acetate. The samples were imaged with a Tecnai G20
TEM (USA). To quantitatively analyze viable bacteria in the bacterial
solutions after different treatments, the bacterial solutions were
serially diluted with PBS, then spread on blood agar plates, and
incubated overnight. Then, the CFUs were counted and calculated.
Biofilm Disruption Assays
Sterile titanium plates were placed in a 24-well plate, and then 1 mL
of S. aureus or E. coli bacterial solutions with a density of 106 CFU
mL−1 were transferred into the plates and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h.
Then, the supernatant in each well was replaced with 1 mL of fresh
TSB medium (control group) or fresh TSB medium containing SS
NPs (20 μg mL−1), SSZ NPs (20 μg mL−1), or antibiotics (20 μg
mL−1 vancomycin for S. aureus, levofloxacin for E. coli). The biofilms
with different treatments were further incubated for 24 h at 37 °C.
Besides, we treated the MRSA biofilm with combined antibiotics (20
μg mL−1 vancomycin and 20 μg mL−1 rifampin) or SSZ NPs (20 μg
mL−1). The implants were then extracted and washed with fresh PBS
thrice. To calculate the number of viable bacteria on the implant, the
implants were transferred to a 15 mL centrifuge tube and then
exposed to sonication for 10 min, followed by vibration for 3 min.
The resulting solution was serially diluted, spread on blood agar
plates, and incubated overnight. Then, the CFUs were counted. For
the SEM study, the implants were fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde
overnight and then serially dehydrated with 50, 70, 80, 90, and 100%
of ethanol solutions. After vacuum freezing and gold spraying, the
implants were imaged with a scanning electron microscope (Hitachi
SU-8000), and the pseudocolor images were processed with Adobe
Photoshop 2022. For CLSM imaging, the biofilms were stained with
LIVE/DEAD BacLight stain for 15 min in the dark, then washed with
PBS thrice, and then photographed with a TCS SP8 laser scanning
confocal microscope (Leica, Germany).
Biofilm-Conditioned Media
A single S. aureus bacterial colony was grown in DMEM
supplemented with 10% FBS at 140 rpm 37 °C to OD600 nm
0.8−1.0. The bacterial solutions were diluted to a concentration of 1
× 106 CFU mL−1 and then added into 6-well cell culture plates with
sterile titanium implants (diameter, 30 mm; thickness, 1 mm). The
biofilms were cultured for 24 h at 37 °C. Then, the culture media
were collected, sterile filtered, and referred to as BCM. The pH of
BCM is adjusted to 7.4 before use.
Macrophage−Bacteria Coculture
We have conducted and reported their intracellular infection assays
according to previously reported experimental standards with some
modifications.68 S. aureus was grown in TSB overnight, then
centrifuged at 6000 rpm for 3 min, and resuspended in DMEM
supplemented with 10% FBS. The bacterial solutions were then
cultured with RAW 264.7 macrophages at a multiplicity of infection of
10:1 to allow phagocytosis at 37 °C for 1 h. The cells were washed
with PBS and further incubated with 50 mg L−1 gentamicin at 37 °C
for 40 min to eliminate the nonphagocytized bacteria. Then, the cells
were washed with PBS to remove gentamicin and incubated in
DMEM with 10% FBS in the presence of 20 μg mL−1 of SS NPs, SSZ
NPs, or rifampicin (denoted BCM+SS, BCM+SSZ, or BCM+Rif,
respectively). After 2 h incubation, the cells were washed with PBS,
scraped, and lysed using 1% Triton X-100 to release the intracellular
bacteria. The lysed solution was serially diluted, spread on blood agar
plates, and incubated overnight, and then the CFUs were counted and
calculated. For Bio-TEM analysis, the cells after different treatments
were scraped, fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde, and prepared as
mentioned above for TEM observation.
Macrophage Phenotypic Assays
RAW 264.7 macrophages were seeded into 24-well plates at a density
of 5 × 104 cells/well and incubated overnight. The culture medium
was discarded, and the cells were cultured in fresh medium
supplemented with 20 μg mL−1 SS NPs (denoted SS), SSZ NPs
(denoted SSZ), or rifampin (denoted Rif). After incubation for 24 h,
the supernatant was harvested, and the cells were washed with PBS.
For immunofluorescence analysis, the cells were fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde overnight, then permeabilized with 0.2% Triton X-
100 for 10 min, and blocked with 3% BSA for 1 h. The cells were then
washed and incubated with mouse monoclonal to iNOS (1:200,
Abcam, Cat.# ab49999), Rabbit polyclonal Phospho-STING (Ser366)
antibody (1:200, Thermo Fisher, #PA5−105674), and Rabbit
polyclonal to mannose receptor (1:200, Abcam, Cat.# ab64693) at
4 °C overnight. The second antibody of Donkey anti-mouse IgG
H&L Alexa Fluor 488 (1:200, Abcam, Cat.# ab150105) and donkey
anti-rabbit IgG H&L Alexa Fluor 594 (1:200, Abcam, Cat.#
ab150076) were used to incubate with the primary antibodies. The
cells were stained with DPAI before observation under a fluorescence
microscope (Leica, Germany). For flow cytometry analysis, the cells
were blocked with an anti-CD16/32-Fc blocker (BioLegend, catalog
no. 101319) and then incubated with APC-labeled anti-CCR7 (4B12,
BioLegend, Cat.# 120108) for 30 min on ice for surface staining. To
stain the intracellular marker, the cells were fixed, permeabilized with
a Cyto-Fast Fix/Perm Buffer Set (BioLegend), and then stained with
PE-labeled anti-CD206 (C068C2, BioLegend, Cat.# 141706). Flow
cytometry data were obtained with a flow cytometer (BD
LSRFortessa) and analyzed using FlowJo software. For cytokine
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6c00422
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 10090−10107
10102

release measurement, the cell supernatant after different treatments
was collected and then analyzed for the levels of IFNβ using the
Mouse IFN-β ELISA Kit (Beyotime, China) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions.
STING Inhibition Assays
RAW 264.7 macrophages were first pretreated for 1 h with C-176 (0.1
μM), a STING inhibitor. Then, untreated macrophages and C-176
pretreated macrophages were infected with S. aureus with an MOI of
10:1 for 1 h, and then the extracellular bacteria were eliminated by
gentamycin as mentioned above. The cells were incubated in fresh
DMEM with 10% FBS in the presence of 20 μg mL−1 SSZ NPs or
rifampicin (denoted SSZ or SSZ+C-176, respectively). After 2 h
incubation, the cells were washed and lysed using 1% Triton X-100.
The number of viable intracellular bacteria was determined with the
CFU counting method as mentioned above. Besides, untreated
macrophages and C-176 pretreated macrophages were coincubated
with 20 μg mL−1 of SSZ NPs (denoted as SSZ or SSZ+C-176,
respectively) for 24 h, then the cell supernatant were harvested for the
measurement of IFNβ levels as mentioned above.
RNA-seq Assays
RAW2 64.7 macrophages with a density of 1 × 105 cells/well were
seeded in six-well plates and cultured at 37 °C overnight. Then, the
culture medium was discarded. The cells were then incubated with
fresh DMEM or DMEM containing 20 μg mL−1 SSZ NPs for 24 h.
The supernatant was discarded, and the cells were washed with PBS.
To extract total RNA, the cells was treated with 1 mL of Trizol
(Invitrogen), and transferred to liquid nitrogen immediately. The
RNA-seq analysis was performed with the DNBseq Platform (BGI
Company, Shenzhen, China). The data analysis was conducted with
the software of Dr.Tom (BGI).
Mice and Rabbits
C57BL/6 mice aged 6−8 weeks and New Zealand White rabbits with
an average weight of 2.5 kg were used in the study. All of the animal-
related experiments are in accordance with the institutional policies
and federal guidelines of the Institutional Animal Care and Use
Committee of the Shanghai Sixth People’s Hospital. Animal-related
procedures were approved by the ethics committee of Shanghai Sixth
People’s Hospital (Approval Number, DWLL2024−0697). Animals
were housed in the room with 12 h dark−light cycles, with a room
temperature of 22 ± 2 °C and a room humidity of 40−70%.
Mice Implant-Related Osteomyelitis Model
Rod-shaped titanium implants (diameter, 0.6 mm; length, 2 mm)
were used in the osteomyelitis model. In order to stimulate bacteria-
infected implants, sterilized implants were incubated with 1 × 106
CFU mL−1 MRSA ATCC 43300 bacterial solutions for 24 h at 37 °C.
C57BL/6 mice aged 6−8 weeks were randomly allocated to four
groups and anesthetized using 1% pentobarbital sodium. The right leg
of the mice was shaved and disinfected. Under a sterile environment,
the medial side of the knee was incised layer by layer, and the distal
femur was exposed after patella dislocation. A 29 G insulin syringe
(BD) was used to drill the distal femur, and then the MRSA-infected
implants was placed into the bone tunnel of the femur. The wound
was sutured layer by layer. The infected mice were treated with intra-
articular injection of 20 mg kg−1 SS NPs or SSZ NPs at days 7, 8, and
9 after bacterial inoculation. For antibiotic control, mice received
vancomycin (20 mg/kg per day intra-articular injection) in
combination with rifampin at 15 mg/kg per day (oral administration)
at days 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and 12 after bacterial inoculation. The infected
legs were dissected on day 28, and the bone tissues and implants were
harvested. For bacterial quantitative analysis, the bone tissues were
weighed and homogenized in 1 mL of PBS. The biofilm adherent to
the implants was isolated by sonication in 1 mL of PBS for 10 min,
followed by 2 min vortex oscillation. The CFUs of viable bacteria
were determined after overnight culture with serial dilutions on blood
agar plates with 100 μL of sonication solutions or tissue homogenates.
For histological analysis, the bone tissues were fixed with 4% PFA,
decalcified with EDTA for 2 weeks, embedded in paraffin, and cut
into tissue sections. The bone tissue sections were stained with Gram
and Giemsa staining according to the manufacturer’s protocols
(ServiceBio, China). For immunofluorescence staining, the bone
tissue sections were dewaxed, followed by antigen repair and BSA
blocking. The tissue sections were then incubated with the first
antibodies of Anti-Granzyme B Mouse mAb (1:200, ServiceBio, Cat.#
GB12093) and Anti-Perforin Rabbit pAb (1:400, ServiceBio, Cat.#
GB11943) overnight at 4 °C. The slices were washed and incubated
with the secondary antibodies of CY3-labeled goat anti-mouse IgG
and Alexa Fluor 488-labeled goat anti-rabbit IgG for 50 min at room
temperature. The slices were washed and stained with DAPI before
being observed with a fluorescence microscope. To stain pSTING and
CD11b, the tissue sections were first incubated with the first antibody
of Rabbit polyclonal Phospho-STING (Ser366) antibody (1:1000,
Thermo Fisher, #PA5−105674) overnight at 4 °C. The secondary
antibody of HRP-labeled goat anti-rabbit IgG was used to react with
the first antibody at room temperature for 50 min. Afterward, the
slices were stained with iF555 TSA staining (ServiceBio, catalogue no.
G1233), followed by antigen repair. The first antibody of recombinant
anti-CD11b antibody (Rabbit mAb, 1:3000, ServiceBio, Cat.#
GB15058) was incubated with the slices overnight. Then, the slices
were stained with HRP-labeled goat anti-rabbit IgG and iF488 TSA
(ServiceBio, Cat.# G1231). After DAPI staining, the slices were
observed with a fluorescence microscope (Leica, Germany).
For Bio-TEM analysis, the bone tissues were fixed and decalcified
as mentioned above. Then, the tissues were post-fixed with 1%
osmium tetroxide (OsO4) for 2 h, followed by dehydration with
ethanol series and acetone at room temperature. After embedding and
polymerization, ultrathin slices with thicknesses of 60−80 nm were
made. The slices were harvested with copper grids and counterstained
using uranyl acetate and lead citrate. The sections were observed with
a Tecnai G20 TEM (USA).
For flow cytometry analysis, the bone marrow was disrupted
mechanically, followed by disaggregation in 1 mg mL−1 collagenase D
medium. The cells were filtered with 70 μm cell strainers and
resupended. ACK lysis buffer (Thermo) was used to lyse the RBCs
for 5 min. The cells were washed and resuspended in ice-cold PBS.
The single cells were stained with antibodies for macrophages (anti-
mouse CD11b, F4/80, CD80, and CD206) and T cells (anti-mouse
CD45, CD3, and CD8) for 30 min on ice. Detailed information about
the antibodies used is provided in Table S1. The cells were washed
with PBS thrice and then analyzed with a flow cytometer (LSR
Fortessa, BD Biosciences). Data analysis was performed with FlowJo
software (BD Biosciences). To measure the level of IFN-γ in the bone
marrow, homogenates of the bone marrow were detected with IFN-γ
ELISA kits (Anogen) according to the manufacturer’s protocols.
To further elucidate the antibacterial mechanism, we constructed a
mouse osteomyelitis model using STING1-KO mice (C57BL/6Jcya
mice, Strain No. S-KO-13963, purchased from Cyagen). The
osteomyelitis model is constructed using MRSA ATCC 43300 as
mentioned above. The infected mice were treated with intra-articular
injection of 20 mg kg−1 SSZ NPs at days 1, 3, and 5 after bacterial
inoculation. For antibiotic control, mice received vancomycin (20
mg/kg per day intra-articular injection) in combination with rifampin
at 15 mg/kg per day (Oral administration) at days 1, 3, and 5 after
bacterial inoculation. The infected legs were dissected on day 7, and
the bone tissues and implants were harvested. CFU count and flow
cytometry analysis were performed as mentioned above.
Bacterial Rechallenge Model
The mouse osteomyelitis model was established as mentioned above.
Fourteen days after bacterial inoculation, the infected implant was
surgically removed, followed by thorough debridement of infected
tissues. Post surgery, mice were treated with intra-articular injection of
20 mg kg−1 SS NPs or SSZ NPs at days 15, 16, and 17. For antibiotic
control, mice received vancomycin (20 mg/kg per day intra-articular
injection) in combination with rifampin at 15 mg/kg per day (oral
administration) at days 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, and 20.38 On day 60 after
bacterial inoculation, MRSA-contaminated implants were surgically
inserted into the bone femur as mentioned above. The infected femur
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6c00422
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 10090−10107
10103

was isolated on day 90. Bacterial CFU counting, Bio-TEM,
histological analysis, flow cytometry analysis, and ELISA analysis
were performed as mentioned above. For immunofluorescence
staining, the first antibodies of recombinant Anti-CD8 α Rabbit
mAb (1:200, ServiceBio, Cat.# GB15068) and Anti-Granzyme B
Mouse mAb (1:200, ServiceBio, Cat.# GB12093) and the secondary
antibodies of Alexa Fluor 488-labeled goat anti-rabbit IgG and CY3-
labeled goat anti-mouse IgG were used. For flow cytometry analysis,
anti-mouse CD3, CD4, CD8, CD44, and CD62L were used. Detailed
information on the antibodies used is provided in Table S2.
Rabbit Knee Periprosthetic Joint Infection (PJI) Model
The rabbit knee PJI model was conducted according to our previous
report69 with some modifications. The rabbits were randomly
allocated into 4 groups (5 in each group). Surgery procedures were
conducted under general anesthesia with 3% pentobarbital (1 mL/
kg). The rabbit’s knee was first shaved, sterilized, and draped with
sterile surgical drapes. The lateral side of the knee was incised layer by
layer to expose the lateral femoral condyle and lateral collateral
ligament (LCL). A hole parallel to the coronal axis of the distal femur
was drilled with a 3.5 mm sterile drill bit, anterior to the LCL. Then, a
metal screw with a diameter of 3.5 mm was implanted into the distal
femur. The joint capsule, deep fascia, and skin were sutured layer by
layer. After surgery, 100 μL of MRSA bacterial solutions (1 × 106
CFU mL−1) were injected into the knee joint near the screws. The
rabbits were treated with intra-articular injection of 20 mg kg−1 of SS
NPs or SSZ NPs at days 7, 10, 14, and 21 after bacterial inoculation.
For antibiotic control (denoted as Ant), mice were received
vancomycin (20 mg/kg per day intra-articular injection) in
combination with rifampin at 15 mg/kg per day (oral administration)
at days 7, 10, 14, and 21. The infected legs were dissected on day 28.
Histopathology analysis and CFU counting were performed with a
protocol similar to that for the mouse infection model.
Statistical Analysis
All results in the bar graphs are presented as the mean ± s.d., unless
otherwise indicated. Normal distribution of the data was tested with
the Shapiro-Wilk test. The significant difference between the two
groups was determined with a two-tailed Student’s t-test. Multiple
comparisons were conducted with a one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) test with Welch’s corrections. All of the statistical data
were graphed and analyzed with GraphPad Prism 6.0, and p-values of
less than 0.05 were considered significant.
■ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
sı Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsnano.6c00422.
TEM and HRTEM images of SS and SSZ NPs; Zn
release; DLS; zeta potential; cytotoxicity analysis; CFU
counts of the E. coli biofilm in vitro; SEM images of the
biofilm; pSTING protein expression; GSEA and heat
map of gene expression for macrophages; Gram staining
of infected femur tissues; flow cytometry results for the
dissected femurs; HE staining of the major organs of
osteomyelitis-bearing mice; FN-γ level in the femurs of
bacterial rechallenged mice; flow cytometry results for
bacterial rechallenged mice; and antibody list (PDF)
■AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Authors
Jiaxing Wang −Department of Orthopaedics, Shanghai Sixth
People’s Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200233, China;
Email: jxwang@shsmu.edu.cn
Hao Shen −Department of Orthopaedics, Shanghai Sixth
People’s Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200233, China;
orcid.org/
0009-0004-6766-6066; Email: shenhao7212@
shsmu.edu.cn
Xianlong Zhang −Department of Orthopaedics, Shanghai
Sixth People’s Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200233, China;
orcid.org/0000-0002-7352-8485;
Email: dr_zhangxianlong@sjtu.edu.cn
Xijian Liu −College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering,
Shanghai University of Engineering Science, Shanghai
201620, China;
orcid.org/0000-0001-5856-9142;
Email: liuxijian@sues.edu.cn
Authors
Chuang Yang −Department of Orthopaedics, Shanghai Sixth
People’s Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200233, China
Nannan Zheng −College of Health Science and
Environmental Engineering, Shenzhen Technology University,
Shenzhen 518118, China
Yao Luo −Department of Orthopaedics, Shanghai Sixth
People’s Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200233, China
Yujie Hu −Department of Orthopaedics, Shanghai Sixth
People’s Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200233, China
Wanbo Zhu −Department of Orthopaedics, Shanghai Sixth
People’s Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200233, China
Qiaojie Wang −Department of Orthopaedics, Shanghai Sixth
People’s Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200233, China
Jin Tang −Department of Clinical Laboratory, Shanghai Sixth
People’s Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200233, China
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acsnano.6c00422
Author Contributions
⊥C.Y., N.Z., and Y.L. contributed equally to this manuscript.
Conceptualization: C.Y., J.W., X.L., H.S., and X.Z. SSZ
preparation and characterization: N.Z., and X.L. Bacterial
experiments: C.Y., Y.L., W.Z., Y.H., and J.T. Cell and animal
experiments: C.Y., Y.L., Y.H., and Q.W. Methodology: C.Y.,
W.Z., and J.W. Writingoriginal draft: C.Y., J.W., X.L., H.S.,
and X.Z. Writingreview and editing: all authors. Supervision:
J.W., X.L., H.S., and X.Z.
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
■ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge the following fundings: National
Natural Science Foundation of China (grant Nos. 82302717
(to C.Y.), 82272513 (to X.Z.), 82272511 (to H.S.), 82302663
(to Y.L.), and 82372427 (to J.W.)), China Postdoctoral
Science Foundation (grant No. 2023M732310 (to C.Y.)),
Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipal-
ity (grant Nos. 23YF1432200 (to C.Y.) and 21140904800 (to
H.S.)), and Excellent Youth Training Program of Shanghai
Sixth People’s Hospital (grant No. ynyq202202 (to J.W.)).
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6c00422
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 10090−10107
10104

■REFERENCES
(1) Alder, K. D.; Lee, I.; Munger, A. M.; Kwon, H.-K.; Morris, M. T.;
Cahill, S. V.; Back, J.; Yu, K. E.; Lee, F. Y. Intracellular Staphylococcus
aureus in bone and joint infections: A mechanism of disease
recurrence, inflammation, and bone and cartilage destruction. Bone
2020, 141, No. 115568.
(2) Peyrusson, F.; Varet, H.; Nguyen, T. K.; Legendre, R.; Sismeiro,
O.; Coppée, J.-Y.; Wolz, C.; Tenson, T.; Van Bambeke, F.
Intracellular Staphylococcus aureus persisters upon antibiotic
exposure. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, No. 2200.
(3) Qu, X.; Wang, M.; Wang, M.; Tang, H.; Zhang, S.; Yang, H.;
Yuan, W.; Wang, Y.; Yang, J.; Yue, B. Multi-Mode Antibacterial
Strategies Enabled by Gene-Transfection and Immunomodulatory
Nanoparticles in 3D-Printed Scaffolds for Synergistic Exogenous and
Endogenous Treatment of Infections. Adv. Mater. 2022, 34,
No. e2200096.
(4) Nandakumar, R.; Tschismarov, R.; Meissner, F.; Prabakaran, T.;
Krissanaprasit, A.; Farahani, E.; Zhang, B.-c.; Assil, S.; Martin, A.;
Bertrams, W.; et al. Intracellular bacteria engage a STING−TBK1−
MVB12b pathway to enable paracrine cGAS−STING signalling. Nat.
Microbiol. 2019, 4, 701−713.
(5) McCulloch, T. R.; Wells, T. J.; Souza-Fonseca-Guimaraes, F.
Towards efficient immunotherapy for bacterial infection. Trends
Microbiol. 2022, 30, 158−169.
(6) Luo, M.; Wang, H.; Wang, Z.; Cai, H.; Lu, Z.; Li, Y.; Du, M.;
Huang, G.; Wang, C.; Chen, X.; et al. A STING-activating
nanovaccine for cancer immunotherapy. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2017, 12,
648−654.
(7) Chen, T.; Feng, Y.; Sun, W.; Zhao, G.; Wu, H.; Cheng, X.; Zhao,
F.; Zhang, L.; Zheng, Y.; Zhan, P.; et al. The nucleotide receptor
STING translocates to the phagosomes to negatively regulate anti-
fungal immunity. Immunity 2023, 56, 1727−1742.e1726.
(8) Watson, R. O.; Bell, S. L.; MacDuff, D. A.; Kimmey, J. M.; Diner,
E. J.; Olivas, J.; Vance, R. E.; Stallings, C. L.; Virgin, H. W.; Cox, J. S.
The Cytosolic Sensor cGAS Detects Mycobacterium tuberculosis DNA
to Induce Type I Interferons and Activate Autophagy. Cell Host
Microbe 2015, 17, 811−819.
(9) Hanson, M. C.; Crespo, M. P.; Abraham, W.; Moynihan, K. D.;
Szeto, G. L.; Chen, S. H.; Melo, M. B.; Mueller, S.; Irvine, D. J.
Nanoparticulate STING agonists are potent lymph node−targeted
vaccine adjuvants. J. Clin. Invest. 2015, 125, 2532−2546.
(10) Koshy, S. T.; Cheung, A. S.; Gu, L.; Graveline, A. R.; Mooney,
D. J. Liposomal Delivery Enhances Immune Activation by STING
Agonists for Cancer Immunotherapy. Adv. Biosyst. 2017, 1,
No. 1600013.
(11) Hood, M. I.; Skaar, E. P. Nutritional immunity: transition
metals at the pathogen−host interface. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2012, 10,
525−537.
(12) Bessman, N. J.; Mathieu, J. R. R.; Renassia, C.; Zhou, L.; Fung,
T. C.; Fernandez, K. C.; Austin, C.; Moeller, J. B.; Zumerle, S.; Louis,
S.; et al. Dendritic cell−derived hepcidin sequesters iron from the
microbiota to promote mucosal healing. Science 2020, 368, 186−189.
(13) Yang, C.; Luo, Y.; Shen, H.; Ge, M.; Tang, J.; Wang, Q.; Lin,
H.; Shi, J.; Zhang, X. Inorganic nanosheets facilitate humoral
immunity against medical implant infections by modulating immune
co-stimulatory pathways. Nat. Commun. 2022, 13, No. 4866.
(14) Wang, Z.; Zeng, Y.; Ahmed, Z.; Qin, H.; Bhatti, I. A.; Cao, H.
Calcium-dependent antimicrobials: Nature-inspired materials and
designs. Exploration 2024, 4, No. 20230099.
(15) Yao, Y.; Chen, Z.; Zhang, H.; Chen, C.; Zeng, M.; Yunis, J.;
Wei, Y.; Wan, Y.; Wang, N.; Zhou, M.; et al. Selenium−GPX4 axis
protects follicular helper T cells from ferroptosis. Nat. Immunol. 2021,
22, 1127−1139.
(16) Shi, X.; Bi, Y.; Yang, W.; Guo, X.; Jiang, Y.; Wan, C.; Li, L.; Bai,
Y.; Guo, J.; Wang, Y.; et al. Ca2+ regulates T-cell receptor activation by
modulating the charge property of lipids. Nature 2013, 493, 111−115.
(17) Wang, C.; Guan, Y.; Lv, M.; Zhang, R.; Guo, Z.; Wei, X.; Du,
X.; Yang, J.; Li, T.; Wan, Y.; et al. Manganese Increases the Sensitivity
of the cGAS-STING Pathway for Double-Stranded DNA and Is
Required for the Host Defense against DNA Viruses. Immunity 2018,
48, 675−687.e677.
(18) Du, M.; Chen, Z. J. DNA-induced liquid phase condensation of
cGAS activates innate immune signaling. Science 2018, 361, 704−709.
(19) Zhu, F.; Lv, L.; Chai, L.; Wang, J.; Wang, M.; Qin, D.; Song,
H.; Fu, Y.; Zhao, C.; Jia, J.; et al. Selenoprotein K enhances STING
oligomerization to facilitate antiviral response. PLoS Pathog. 2023, 19,
No. e1011314.
(20) Wang, J.; Zhou, H.; Guo, G.; Tan, J.; Wang, Q.; Tang, J.; Liu,
W.; Shen, H.; Li, J.; Zhang, X. Enhanced Anti-Infective Efficacy of
ZnO Nanoreservoirs through a Combination of Intrinsic Anti-Biofilm
Activity and Reinforced Innate Defense. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces
2017, 9, 33609−33623.
(21) Liu, X.; Deng, G.; Wang, Y.; Wang, Q.; Gao, Z.; Sun, Y.; Zhang,
W.; Lu, J.; Hu, J. A novel and facile synthesis of porous SiO2-coated
ultrasmall Se particles as a drug delivery nanoplatform for efficient
synergistic treatment of cancer cells. Nanoscale 2016, 8, 8536−8541.
(22) Li, X.; Wang, Q.; Deng, G.; Liu, Y.; Wei, B.; Liu, X.; Bao, W.;
Wang, Q.; Wu, S. Porous Se@SiO2 nanospheres attenuate cisplatin-
induced acute kidney injury via activation of Sirt1. Toxicol. Appl.
Pharmacol. 2019, 380, No. 114704.
(23) Niu, T.; Shi, X.; Liu, X.; Wang, H.; Liu, K.; Xu, Y. Porous Se@
SiO2 nanospheres alleviate diabetic retinopathy by inhibiting excess
lipid peroxidation and inflammation. Mol. Med. 2024, 30, No. 24.
(24) Ding, C.; Yang, C.; Cheng, T.; Wang, X.; Wang, Q.; He, R.;
Sang, S.; Zhu, K.; Xu, D.; Wang, J.; et al. Macrophage-biomimetic
porous Se@SiO2 nanocomposites for dual modal immunotherapy
against inflammatory osteolysis. J. Nanobiotechnol. 2021, 19, No. 382.
(25) Hadrup, N.; Ravn-Haren, G. Toxicity of repeated oral intake of
organic selenium, inorganic selenium, and selenium nanoparticles: A
review. J. Trace Elem. Med. Biol. 2023, 79, No. 127235.
(26) Zheng, N.; Wang, Q.; Li, C.; Wang, X.; Liu, X.; Wang, X.;
Deng, G.; Wang, J.; Zhao, L.; Lu, J. Responsive Degradable
Theranostic Agents Enable Controlled Selenium Delivery to Enhance
Photothermal Radiotherapy and Reduce Side Effects. Adv. Healthcare
Mater. 2021, 10, No. e2002024.
(27) Wang, X.; Sun, T.; Zhu, H.; Han, T.; Wang, J.; Dai, H. Roles of
pH, cation valence, and ionic strength in the stability and aggregation
behavior of zinc oxide nanoparticles. J. Environ. Manage. 2020, 267,
No. 110656.
(28) Yao, S.; Chi, J.; Wang, Y.; Zhao, Y.; Luo, Y.; Wang, Y. Zn-MOF
Encapsulated Antibacterial and Degradable Microneedles Array for
Promoting Wound Healing. Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2021, 10,
No. e2100056.
(29) Blaskovich, M. A. T.; Hansford, K. A.; Butler, M. S.; Ramu, S.;
Kavanagh, A. M.; Jarrad, A. M.; Prasetyoputri, A.; Pitt, M. E.; Huang,
J. X.; Lindahl, F.; et al. A lipoglycopeptide antibiotic for Gram-positive
biofilm-related infections. Sci. Transl. Med. 2022, 14, No. eabj2381.
(30) Price, J. V.; Vance, R. E. The Macrophage Paradox. Immunity
2014, 41, 685−693.
(31) Alboslemy, T.; Yu, B.; Rogers, T.; Kim, M.-H.; Freitag, N. E.
Staphylococcus aureus Biofilm-Conditioned Medium Impairs Macro-
phage-Mediated Antibiofilm Immune Response by Upregulating
KLF2 Expression. Infect. Immun. 2019, 87, e00643−00618.
(32) Saliba, A.-E.; Li, L.; Westermann, A. J.; Appenzeller, S.; Stapels,
D. A. C.; Schulte, L. N.; Helaine, S.; Vogel, J. Single-cell RNA-seq ties
macrophage polarization to growth rate of intracellular Salmonella.
Nat. Microbiol. 2017, 2, No. 16206.
(33) Dang, A. T.; Teles, R. M. B.; Weiss, D. I.; Parvatiyar, K.; Sarno,
E. N.; Ochoa, M. T.; Cheng, G.; Gilliet, M.; Bloom, B. R.; Modlin, R.
L. IL-26 contributes to host defense against intracellular bacteria. J.
Clin. Invest. 2019, 129, 1926−1939.
(34) Brown Harding, H.; Kwaku, G. N.; Reardon, C. M.; Khan, N.
S.; Zamith-Miranda, D.; Zarnowski, R.; Tam, J. M.; Bohaen, C. K.;
Richey, L.; Mosallanejad, K.; et al. Candida albicans extracellular
vesicles trigger type I IFN signalling via cGAS and STING. Nat.
Microbiol. 2024, 9, 95−107.
(35) Pham, P. T.; Fukuda, D.; Nishimoto, S.; Kim-Kaneyama, J.-R.;
Lei, X.-F.; Takahashi, Y.; Sato, T.; Tanaka, K.; Suto, K.; Kawabata, Y.;
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6c00422
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 10090−10107
10105

et al. STING, a cytosolic DNA sensor, plays a critical role in
atherogenesis: a link between innate immunity and chronic
inflammation caused by lifestyle-related diseases. Eur. Heart J. 2021,
42, 4336−4348.
(36) Hopfner, K.-P.; Hornung, V. Molecular mechanisms and
cellular functions of cGAS−STING signalling. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.
2020, 21, 501−521.
(37) Osmon, D. R.; Berbari, E. F.; Berendt, A. R.; Lew, D.;
Zimmerli, W.; Steckelberg, J. M.; Rao, N.; Hanssen, A.; Wilson, W. R.
Diagnosis and Management of Prosthetic Joint Infection: Clinical
Practice Guidelines by the Infectious Diseases Society of Americaa.
Clin. Infect. Dis. 2013, 56, e1−e25.
(38) Gordon, O.; Lee, D. E.; Liu, B.; Langevin, B.; Ordonez, A. A.;
Dikeman, D. A.; Shafiq, B.; Thompson, J. M.; Sponseller, P. D.;
Flavahan, K.; et al. Dynamic PET-facilitated modeling and high-dose
rifampin regimens for Staphylococcus aureus orthopedic implant−
associated infections. Sci. Transl. Med. 2021, 13, No. eabl6851.
(39) Sanchez, E. E.; Tello-Lafoz, M.; Guo, A. J.; de Jesus, M.;
Elbanna, Y. A.; Winer, B. Y.; Budhu, S.; Chan, E.; Rosiek, E.; Kondo,
T.; et al. Apoptotic contraction drives target cell release by cytotoxic
T cells. Nat. Immunol. 2023, 24, 1434−1442.
(40) Melissen, P. M. B.; van Vianen, W. Fau.; Bidjai, O.; Bidjai, O.
Fau.; van Marion, M.; van Marion, M. Fau.; Bakker-Woudenberg, I.
A.; Bakker-Woudenberg, I. A. Free versus liposome-encapsulated
muramyl tripeptide phosphatidylethanolamide (MTPPE) and inter-
feron-y (IFN-y) in experimental infection with Listeria monocyto-
genes. Biotherapy. 1993, 6, 113−124.
(41) Bernard, L.; Arvieux, C.; Brunschweiler, B.; Touchais, S.;
Ansart, S.; Bru, J.-P.; Oziol, E.; Boeri, C.; Gras, G.; Druon, J.; et al.
Antibiotic Therapy for 6 or 12 Weeks for Prosthetic Joint Infection.
N. Engl. J. Med. 2021, 384, 1991−2001.
(42) Zimmerli, W. Role of Rifampin for Treatment of Orthopedic
Implant−Related Staphylococcal Infections: A Randomized Con-
trolled Trial. Jama 1998, 279, 1537−1541.
(43) Chaussade, H.; Uçkay, I.; Vuagnat, A.; Druon, J.; Gras, G.;
Rosset, P.; Lipsky, B. A.; Bernard, L. Antibiotic therapy duration for
prosthetic joint infections treated by Debridement and Implant
Retention (DAIR): Similar long-term remission for 6 weeks as
compared to 12 weeks. Int. J. Infect. Dis. 2017, 63, 37−42.
(44) Zhou, J.; Liu, J.; Wang, B.; Li, N.; Liu, J.; Han, Y.; Cao, X.
Eosinophils promote CD8+ T cell memory generation to potentiate
anti-bacterial immunity. Signal Transduction Targeted Ther. 2024, 9,
No. 43.
(45) Foulds, K. E.; Rotte, M. J.; Seder, R. A. IL-10 is required for
optimal CD8 T cell memory following Listeria monocytogenes
infection. J. Immunol. 2006, 177, 2565−2574.
(46) Tan, H.-l.; Ao, H.-y.; Ma, R.; Lin, W.-t.; Tang, T.-t. In Vivo
Effect of Quaternized Chitosan-Loaded Polymethylmethacrylate Bone
Cement on Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis In-
fection of the Tibial Metaphysis in a Rabbit Model. Antimicrob. Agents
Chemother. 2014, 58, 6016−6023.
(47) Zhang, T.; Lei, T.; Han, J.; Chen, Y.; Nie, Y.; Zhang, R.; Cai,
H.; Guo, Z.; Yan, R.; Li, Z.; et al. A bioinspired mineralized collagen
scaffold promotes enthesis healing and activates Gli1 expression in
preclinical models. Sci. Transl. Med. 2025, 17, No. eado6948.
(48) Chae, K.; Jang, W. Y.; Park, K.; Lee, J.; Kim, H.; Lee, K.; Lee,
C. K.; Lee, Y.; Lee, S. H.; Seo, J. Antibacterial infection and immune-
evasive coating for orthopedic implants. Sci. Adv. 2020, 6,
No. eabb0025.
(49) Wang, Z.; Chu, Y.; Du, J.; Hu, Y.; Wang, H.; Liu, H.; Yang, C.;
Wang, M.; Ran, J.; Yu, A. Accelerating repair of infected bone defects
through post-reinforced injectable hydrogel mediated antibacterial/
immunoregulatory microenvironment at bone-hydrogel interface.
Carbohydr. Polym. 2025, 351, No. 123082.
(50) Du, J.; Chu, Y.; Hu, Y.; Liu, J.; Liu, H.; Wang, H.; Yang, C.;
Wang, Z.; Yu, A.; Ran, J. A multifunctional self-reinforced injectable
hydrogel for enhancing repair of infected bone defects by
simultaneously targeting macrophages, bacteria, and bone marrow
stromal cells. Acta Biomater. 2024, 189, 232−253.
(51) Hu, Y.; Tang, L.; Wang, Z.; Yan, H.; Yi, X.; Wang, H.; Ma, L.;
Yang, C.; Ran, J.; Yu, A. Inducing in situ M2 macrophage polarization
to promote the repair of bone defects via scaffold-mediated sustained
delivery of luteolin. J. Controlled Release 2024, 365, 889−904.
(52) Vallet-Regí, M.; Schüth, F.; Lozano, D.; Colilla, M.; Manzano,
M. Engineering mesoporous silica nanoparticles for drug delivery:
where are we after two decades? Chem. Soc. Rev. 2022, 51, 5365−
5451.
(53) Aguilera-Correa, J. J.; Tasrini, Y.; Gisbert-Garzarán, M.; Boulay,
A.; Carvalho, T.; Blanchet, F. P.; Vallet-Regí, M.; Kremer, L. In vivo
antimicrobial activity of engineered mesoporous silica nanoparticles
targeting intracellular mycobacteria. Nat. Commun. 2025, 16,
No. 7388.
(54) Gong, J.-Y.; Li, Y.; Wang, P.; Peng, X.; Xie, R.; Wang, W.; Liu,
Z.; Pan, D.-W.; Ju, X.-J.; Chu, L.-Y. K+-Responsive Nanoparticles with
Charge Reversal and Gating Synergistic Effects for Targeted
Intracellular Bacteria Eradication. ACS Nano 2025, 19, 2345−2361.
(55) Ge, M.; Ruan, Z.; Zhu, Y.-X.; Wu, W.; Yang, C.; Lin, H.; Shi, J.
A natural killer cell mimic against intracellular pathogen infections.
Sci. Adv. 2024, 10, No. eadp3976.
(56) Liu, Z.-Z.; Yang, Y.-J.; Zhou, C.-K.; Yan, S.-Q.; Ma, K.; Gao, Y.;
Chen, W. STING Contributes to Host Defense Against Staph-
ylococcus aureus Pneumonia Through Suppressing Necroptosis.
Front. Immunol. 2021, 12, No. 636861.
(57) Davies, D. Understanding biofilm resistance to antibacterial
agents. Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 2003, 2, 114−122.
(58) Powell, L. C.; Cullen, J. K.; Boyle, G. M.; De Ridder, T.; Yap,
P.-Y.; Xue, W.; Pierce, C. J.; Pritchard, M. F.; Menzies, G. E.;
Abdulkarim, M.; et al. Topical, immunomodulatory epoxy-tiglianes
induce biofilm disruption and healing in acute and chronic skin
wounds. Sci. Transl. Med. 2022, 14, No. eabn3758.
(59) Zhao, K.; Li, W.; Li, J.; Ma, T.; Wang, K.; Yuan, Y.; Li, J. S.; Xie,
R.; Huang, T.; Zhang, Y.; et al. TesG is a type I secretion effector of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa that suppresses the host immune response
during chronic infection. Nat. Microbiol. 2019, 4, 459−469.
(60) Cheng, H.; Ji, Z.; Wang, Y.; Li, S.; Tang, T.; Wang, F.; Peng, C.;
Wu, X.; Cheng, Y.; Liu, Z.; et al. Mycobacterium tuberculosis produces
d-serine under hypoxia to limit CD8+ T cell-dependent immunity in
mice. Nat. Microbiol. 2024, 9, 1856−1872.
(61) Bell, R. D.; Cann, E. A.; Mishra, B.; Valencia, M.; Zhang, Q.;
Huang, M.; Yang, X.; Carli, A.; Bostrom, M.; Ivashkiv, L. B.
Staphyloccocus aureus biofilm, in absence of planktonic bacteria,
produces factors that activate counterbalancing inflammatory and
immune-suppressive genes in human monocytes. J. Orthop. Res. 2024,
42, 2582−2592.
(62) Cortes-Penfield, N.; Krsak, M.; Damioli, L.; Henry, M.;
Seidelman, J.; Hewlett, A.; Certain, L. How We Approach Suppressive
Antibiotic Therapy Following Debridement, Antibiotics, and Implant
Retention for Prosthetic Joint Infection. Clin. Infect. Dis. 2024, 78,
188−198.
(63) Zhao, Y.; Zhao, S.; Du, Y.; Gao, Z.; Li, Y.; Ma, H.; Li, H.; Ren,
X.; Fan, Q.; Wu, D.; Wei, Q. Inverse Oxide/Alloy-Structured
Nanozymes with NIR-Triggered Enzymatic Cascade Regulation of
ROS Homeostasis for Efficient Wound Healing. Adv. Mater. 2025, 37,
No. e2418731.
(64) Xiang, Y.; Lu, J.; Mao, C.; Zhu, Y.; Wang, C.; Wu, J.; Liu, X.;
Wu, S.; Kwan, K. Y. H.; Cheung, K. M. C.; Yeung, K. W. Ultrasound-
triggered interfacial engineering-based microneedle for bacterial
infection acne treatment. Sci. Adv. 2023, 9, No. eadf0854.
(65) Kim, G.-m.; Oh, S.; Kim, K.-s. Biogenic Selenium Nanoparticles
from Lactiplantibacillus plantarum as a Potent Antimicrobial Agent
Against Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Pharmaceutics
2026, 18, No. 14.
(66) Wang, J.; Zhou, H.; Guo, G.; Tan, J.; Wang, Q.; Tang, J.; Liu,
W.; Shen, H.; Li, J.; Zhang, X. Enhanced Anti-Infective Efficacy of
ZnO Nanoreservoirs through a Combination of Intrinsic Anti-Biofilm
Activity and Reinforced Innate Defense. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces.
2017, 9, 33609−33623.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6c00422
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 10090−10107
10106

(67) He, R.; Ding, C.; Luo, Y.; Guo, G.; Tang, J.; Shen, H.; Wang,
Q.; Zhang, X. Congener-Induced Sulfur-Related Metabolism Inter-
ference Therapy Promoted by Photothermal Sensitization for
Combating Bacteria. Adv. Mater. 2021, 33, No. e2104410.
(68) Subramaniam, S.; Joyce, P.; Ogunniyi, A. D.; Dube, A.;
Sampson, S. L.; Lehr, C.-M.; Prestidge, C. A. Minimum Information
for Conducting and Reporting In Vitro Intracellular Infection Assays.
ACS Infectious Diseases 2024, 10, 337−349.
(69) Wang, J.; Li, J.; Qian, S.; Guo, G.; Wang, Q.; Tang, J.; Shen, H.;
Liu, X.; Zhang, X.; Chu, P. K. Antibacterial Surface Design of
Titanium-Based Biomaterials for Enhanced Bacteria-Killing and Cell-
Assisting Functions Against Periprosthetic Joint Infection. ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8, 11162−11178.
ACS Nano
www.acsnano.org
Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6c00422
ACS Nano 2026, 20, 10090−10107
10107