Chemical Engineering Journal 465 (2023) 142817
Available online 6 April 2023
1385-8947/© 2023 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Review 
Colorimetric sensing of biomarkers based on the enzyme-mimetic activity 
of metal nanoclusters 
Nan Gao, Jiaqi Xu, Xiaodan Li, Guixia Ling *, Peng Zhang * 
Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, No. 103, Wenhua Road, Shenyang 110016, China   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Metal nanoclusters (MNCs) 
Enzyme-mimetic 
Colorimetric sensing 
A B S T R A C T   
Metal nanoclusters (MNCs) less than 10 nm in size have emerged as exciting functional nanomaterials. As a new 
generation of artificial mimetic enzymes, they exhibit similar catalytic efficiency and better stability than natural 
enzymes, while maintaining a certain activity level in harsh conditions, such as strong acids, bases, and a wider 
temperature range. In this review, the synthesis approaches of MNCs are summarized and their enzyme-like 
properties are briefly described including peroxidase (POD)-like, oxidase (OXD)-like, catalase (CAT)-like, and 
superoxide dismutase (SOD)-like activities. Importantly, the applications of MNCs with mimetic enzyme activ­
ities for colorimetric sensing detection of biomarkers are also highlighted and types of colorimetric-based sensors 
such as smartphones, paper, and microneedles are briefly illustrated.   
1. Introduction 
Different kinds of diseases have always been one of the major threats 
faced by human beings. Over the years, human beings have never 
stopped following in the footsteps of health. The detection of biomarkers 
in the body is of great importance in assessing health status, and they are 
generally regarded as the quantifiable markers that indicate certain 
biological states of the human body [1]. Early disease detection for the 
most efficient treatment can be achieved with a simple protocol, which 
can accurately detect the biomarkers early to monitor the condition. For 
example, health status can be predicted by detecting the activity or 
concentration of glucose, cholesterol, dopamine, and hydrogen peroxide 
(H2O2), thereby giving certain relevant information to clinical treatment 
[2]. For example, low cholesterol levels are the perfect diagnostic in­
dicator for anemia, malnutrition, and hyperthyroidism, while high 
cholesterol levels can lead to cardiovascular disease and nephrosis [3]. 
Acting as important biocatalysts, enzymes participate in hundreds of 
catalytic reactions in the body to ensure the proper function of the body. 
They are often highly specific and catalytically active, yet their insta­
bility in external conditions, harsh extraction conditions, and expensive 
isolation cost greatly limit the applications of natural enzymes in vitro. 
Over the last decades, nanozymes based on enzyme-like activity have 
attracted much attention due to their low cost and high stability. 
Nanozymes are defined as nanomaterials that catalyze the conversion of 
enzyme substrates into products and follow enzyme kinetics, although 
possibly accompanied by a molecular mechanism different from that of 
natural enzymes [4]. The first mimetic enzyme, Fe3O4, was proposed in 
2007 by Gao and co-workers [5]. They found that the magnetic nano­
particles (NPs) could catalyze the oxidation of different peroxidase 
(POD) substrates with intrinsic enzyme-mimetic activity similar to that 
of natural enzymes. Since then, various nanomaterials, including noble 
metal NPs, transition msulfideshides, metal oxides, and carbon-based 
nanomaterials have been explored to show activities similar to natural 
enzymes [6–9]. These simple, stable, and cost-effective nanozymes have 
been widely used in biomedical fields such as disease therapeutics and 
diagnostics. For example, nanozymes with SOD-like activity have been 
demonstrated to reduce intracellular reactive oxygen (ROS) levels for 
the treatment of oxidative stress-related diseases such as ischemic stroke 
[10], sepsis [11], and acute lung injury [12], with potential as antioxi­
dants and anti-inflammatory agents. Nanozymes with POD-like activity 
are often used in assays for disease monitoring [13]. As the catalytic 
mechanism of nanozymes continues to be revealed, nanozymes with 
superior activity are gradually developed by adjusting preparation pa­
rameters such as size, morphology, or surface modification, showing 
great potential for biomedical applications [14,15]. 
Metal nanoclusters (MNCs), a novel type of ultra-small nano­
materials, are generally composed of several to thousands of atoms [16]. 
The most common MNCs include gold nanoclusters (Au NCs), silver 
nanoclusters (Ag NCs), and copper nanoclusters (Cu NCs). In addition to 
these, MNCs centered on platinum (Pt) and palladium (Pd) metals have 
* Corresponding authors. 
E-mail addresses: pharlab@163.com (G. Ling), zhangpengspu@163.com (P. Zhang).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Chemical Engineering Journal 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/cej 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2023.142817 
Received 18 November 2022; Received in revised form 12 March 2023; Accepted 4 April 2023   

Chemical Engineering Journal 465 (2023) 142817
2
been synthesized successively. Due to their excellent properties such as 
high photochemical stability, enzyme-like activity, and large Stokes 
shift, metal nanoclusters have been widely applied in bio-imaging, 
fluorescent probes, and catalysis in recent years. At present, most of 
the researches have been devoted to the synthesis of luminescent MNCs 
for fluorescence analysis and detection, which have the benefits of high 
sensitivity, low detectability, and good selectivity [17,18]. However, the 
large and expensive instruments used in fluorescence analysis greatly 
limit its wide applications. Colorimetry is a detection method that can 
accurately express the concentration of substances according to the 
change of color. Compared with other methods, it does not require so­
phisticated instruments, and the change of concentration can be judged 
by the naked eyes, which is low in cost and simple to operate [19]. 
Although researchers have now made considerable progress in the 
field of nanomaterials, there is still no uniform caliber for nano­
materials’ clinical scope of application and in vivo safety. In contrast, for 
biomarker sensing, nanomaterials barely enter the body, addressing the 
most important safety issue of nanomaterials. The portability, compli­
ance, and affordability of colorimetric sensing are far superior to other 
complex assays. Just when MNCs are at an early stage of development, it 
is worthwhile to continue exploring them in depth. In 2019, Meng et al. 
[20] summarized and reported the enzymatic activities of MNCs and 
described their applications in some fields such as molecular diagnostics 
and contaminant removal, with the focuses on MNCs synthesized with 
protein as a protective agent. In this review, MNCs with polymers, DNA, 
RNA, and thiolate as templates are extended and introduced. Moreover, 
other synthetic methods such as microwave-assisted and ligand-etching 
methods are also discussed. In addition, the structures and characteris­
tics of MNCs that contribute to the detection of biomarkers are high­
lighted and the colorimetric sensing platforms are illustrated, making 
MNCs more promising for practical applications (Fig. 1). 
2. Structure and synthesis of MNCs 
2.1. Structure of MNCs 
A metal nanocluster is a transition state between a metal atom and a 
nanoparticle, usually consisting of three parts: an internal metal nucleus, 
a repeating structure of nucleus and ligand, and a spatial ligand [21]. 
The most classical single-size thiolate-protected Au NCs ([Aun(SR)m]q) 
are often used to describe the composition of single-size Au NC products, 
where n is the number of Au atoms, m is the number of thiolate ligands 
(SR) and q is the total valence charge on the cluster [22]. As shown in 
Fig. 2 (A), tightly packed metal cores formed a secondary structure such 
as SR-[Au(I)-SR]2 in the presence of ligands, and then the spatial ligands 
were evenly distributed on the outer side to prevent the highly reactive 
cores from breaking down or agglomerating. In contrast, bimetallic 
nanoclusters were considered to have a bicore structure. Different ratios 
of the two metals and ligands would result in nanoclusters with diverse 
morphologies and properties (Fig. 2 (B)). 
2.2. The approaches for synthesis methods of MNCs 
Depending on the synthesis pathway, the synthesis of MNCs can be 
divided into “bottom-up” and “top-down” methods [24]. The former 
method, also known as the direct reduction method, usually involves the 
reduction of metal ions to metal atoms in the presence of reducing 
agents, followed by gradual nucleation and growth under the protection 
of a ligand shell to form MNCs of the desired size, where the ligand acts 
as a protective agent to effectively avoid agglomeration and oxidation of 
the MNCs. The top-down approach involves the synthesis of ultra-small 
nanoclusters from larger metal NPs by etching or some special physi­
cochemical means. In general, the bottom-up process is the most widely 
used method for the preparation of MNCs, with high yields, short syn­
thesis time, and simple reaction process. In contrast, the top-down 
Fig. 1. Metal nanoclusters with mimic enzyme properties for colorimetric sensing.  
N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Chemical Engineering Journal 465 (2023) 142817
3
process is more time-consuming and has lower yields. The followings are 
some of the conventional and widely used methods for the synthesis of 
MNCs. 
2.2.1. Template method 
Template-assisted synthesis is one of the most popular bottom-up 
methods for the synthesis of MNCs. The molecules with specific spatial 
structures are used as the template for the synthesis of MNCs and are 
reduced to atoms by metal ions binding and clusters forming on the 
template. The spatial resistance of the template helps to prevent MNCs 
from clustering or breaking down in solution, while the presence of 
functional groups on the template provides multiple binding sites for the 
metal ions. Different types of templates can provide different functional 
groups and give different spatial structures and functions to the MNCs, 
which is important for the synthesis of controlled MNCs. Zhou et al. [25] 
prepared orange fluorescent Cu NCs by a one-pot method using lipoic 
acid as a capping protector and tetrakis (hydroxymethyl) phosphonium 
chloride (THPC) as a reducing agent. Until now, THPC has been widely 
used to prepare Au NCs as a mild reductant [26]. In general, the capping 
protective agent and the reducing agent can be two different substances, 
but sometimes one reagent can also serve two purposes, such as sodium 
citrate and folic acid [27,28]. In addition to the above common pro­
tective agents, the following different types of templates have also been 
applied in the synthesis of MNCs. 
2.2.1.1. Protein or enzymes. Proteins are widely acclaimed as effective 
templates for MNCs due to their easy availability and the abundant 
functional groups on their surfaces. Back in 2011, Wang et al. [29] 
demonstrated that bovine serum protein-stabilized Au NCs (BSA-Au 
NCs) had a high degree of POD-mimetic activity, which could be used 
over a wider pH and temperature range and was more stable than nat­
ural enzymes. Stability experiments have shown that BSA-Au NCs could 
be stable over a wide pH range of 1 to 14 and a temperature range of 4 to 
90 ◦C. Furthermore, the limit of detection (LOD) for H2O2 by using BSA- 
Au NCs could reach 2.0 × 10-8 M. Depending on the POD activity of the 
BSA-Au NCs, xanthine was also detected in the range of 1 × 10-6 to 2 ×
10-4 M with a LOD of 5 × 10-7 M. In 2014, based on the same principle, 
folate-modified BSA-Au NCs were prepared by Hu et al. [30] for tumor 
tissue visualization to distinguish cancer cells and normal cells. 
Currently, papain, lysozyme, silk fibroin, trypsin, and pepsin have been 
used to prepare MNCs [31–35]. It has been shown that the proteins are 
environmentally friendly and inherently biocompatible, allowing the 
synthesis process to be carried out under mild reaction conditions to 
obtain MNCs with excellent water solubility and stability [36]. 
2.2.1.2. Polymers. Polymers often act as templates for the efficient 
preparation of MNCs because of their good biocompatibility and perfect 
functional groups. For example, polyethyleneimine (PEI), originally 
designed only for the synthesis of Ag NCs, is now also utilized for the 
synthesis of Au NCs, Cu NCs, and Pt NCs. PEI can easily induce aggre­
gation of MNCs to change their fluorescence behavior in terms of color 
or peak and has been applied extensively in the fluorescent colorimetric 
detection of a number of biomarkers [37,38]. Besides, PEI can also serve 
as a stabilizer to modify Pt NPs for colorimetric detection of glucose 
based on their POD properties [39]. Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) is a 
common stabilizer due to its good water solubility, low toxicity, and 
spatial site-blocking effect. Liu et al. [40] synthesized Pt NCs with OXD- 
like activity by preventing aggregation of Pt nanocrystals through Pt-N 
bond interactions between PVP and Pt. The Pt NCs synthesized with 
PVP as a stabilizer and reducing agent could oxidize o-phenylenedi­
amine (OPD) to yellow OPD oxidation (oxOPD), and the colorimetric 
detection was achieved by inhibiting oxOPD with ascorbic acid, and the 
LOD was 18.9 μM. 
2.2.1.3. DNA or RNA. DNA can interact with metal ions and thus 
become templates for the preparation of MNCs. Zheng et al. [41] pro­
posed a simple one-step synthesis method to prepare Ag/Pt NCs with 
DNA as a template and confirmed that the nanoclusters had efficient 
POD activity. Based on the affinity of cytosine bases for Ag+, Ag+ was 
Fig. 2. Structural analysis of MNCs. (A) Schematic 
diagram of the hierarchical structure of SR- 
protected MNCs. Color codes: yellow, Au; red, S; 
gray, C; light gray, H. Reproduced from Ref. [21], 
Copyright (2021), with permission from Elsevier. 
(B) Overall structures of [(Ag)44SR]30
4– and/or [(Au- 
Ag)44SR]30
4– 
(a); 
Crystal 
structures 
of 
[Ag136(SR)65Br2]−
(b) and Ag374(SR)115Br2 (c); 
Au12@Ag20 core (d); Surface Ag2(SR)5 motif (e). 
Color codes: orange, Au/Ag; green, Ag; yellow, S; 
brown, halogen; gray, C. Reproduced from Ref. [23], 
Copyright (2018), with permission from American 
Chemical Society. (For interpretation of the refer­
ences to color in this figure legend, the reader is 
referred to the web version of this article.)   
N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Chemical Engineering Journal 465 (2023) 142817
4
reduced to Ag NCs by using C-rich DNA as a template and NaBH4 as a 
reducing agent, and then the growth of Pt2+ was triggered by an elec­
trical replacement reaction and continued by NaBH4 reduction to obtain 
the target nanoclusters with particle size less than 10 nm. Kermani et al. 
[42] performed a colorimetric detection for DNA methyl transferase 
(DNA MTase) by exploiting the POD activity of DNA-Ag/Pt NCs while 
avoiding the use of restriction endonucleases, and the abnormal 
behavior of this enzyme level has been used as a biomarker for various 
cancers such as gastric, colon, and lung cancers. 
2.2.1.4. Thiolate. Sulfate is employed as a stabilizer for MNCs because 
the S in sulfate is readily bound to metal ions to avoid aggregation into 
larger NPs. Glutathione (GSH), a peptide consisting of N-γ-glutamyl- 
cysteinyl-glycine, has been developed as a connector for binding to 
metal NPs via its thiol groups [43]. Using the reduced form of GSH as a 
template, ultra-small Cu NCs with three mimetic enzymatic activities of 
CAT, glutathione POD (GPx), and SOD were synthesized, offering good 
therapeutic potential in the future treatment of ROS-related diseases 
[44]. The cysteine (Cys) surface is rich in amino and sulfhydryl groups, 
where the sulfhydryl groups can be attached to the surface of MNCs via 
M−S bonds and the amino groups are used to recognize groups or mo­
lecular substances. Cys is reductive under alkaline conditions and can 
reduce Cu2+ to Cu atoms. Therefore, it is generally not necessary to add 
reducing agents but only to adjust the pH for the preparation of Cu NCs. 
The small-size (~2 nm) nanoclusters synthesized by this method had 
very promising optical properties such as significant quantum yields and 
excellent photostability [45]. Abarghoei et al. [46] proposed Cys-Au NCs 
with intrinsic POD-mimetic activity for the detection of citrate, a 
biomarker for the early detection of prostate cancer. A simple colori­
metric detection was established for the detection of citrate because the 
citrate surface groups were bound to Cys via hydrogen bonding, 
resulting in the formation of a coating on the Au NCs that inhibited the 
POD activity of the nanoclusters. 
2.2.2. Microwave-assisted method 
Microwave-assisted technologies have received significant attention 
in the preparation of nanomaterials because of their unique and 
intriguing benefits of fast and uniform heating, low energy consumption, 
time savings, and environmental friendliness [36]. And it is often used to 
synthesize MNCs with high luminescence properties for fluorescent 
colorimetric sensing. For example, Jayasree et al. [47] synthesized BSA- 
CuNCs for the fluorescent detection of bilirubin by microwave-assisted 
methods. The synthesized nanoclusters were obtainable by simply stir­
ring of the raw materials and irradiating them in a microwave at 280 W 
for 40 s. After standing for 24 h, they could emit blue-violet fluores­
cence. The size and morphology of the MNCs could be effectively 
modified by controlling the time and power of the microwave electro­
magnetic radiation or the concentration of the precursors. 
2.2.3. Ligand-etching method 
Ligand-etching is a method of preparing MNCs by non-direct 
reduction, where large metal NPs are first synthesized and then 
smaller MNCs were obtained by physical or chemical etchings. Poly­
amines and thiol molecules, which could accelerate the transition from 
NPs to precious metal clusters, are widely exploited for the preparation 
of MNCs. Le Guevel et al. [48] used GSH to etch Pt NPs to prepare 
fluorescent Pt NCs by controlling the temperature, ratio, and etching 
time. Finally, Pt NCs with the highest yellow fluorescence intensity were 
obtained by etching at 65 ◦C for 6 days. However, these ligands are not 
suitable for Ag NPs, as the strong binding force leads to the further 
dissolution of Ag NPs into Ag+ with low stability. Based on this, Choi 
et al. [49] first investigated the etching of Ag NPs with ssDNA as a 
protector and diethylenetriamine as a ligand to obtain strongly fluo­
rescent Ag NCs. Since the amino group of the ligand did not have the 
ability to bond Ag+ under acidic conditions, a lower fluorescence could 
be observed at pH 5.5, indicating that the etching method was a strongly 
pH-dependent process. Therefore, a suitable ligand is essential for the 
synthesis of MNCs. 
3. The characteristics of MNCs for colorimetric sensing 
3.1. Size dependency 
The most important feature and advantage of MNCs is their apparent 
small size and, as their size decreases, the percentage of exposed atoms 
on their surface increases significantly. For example, as the size of Pd 
NCs increases from 1.2 nm to 3.4 nm, the percentage of exposed atoms 
on the surface decreases from as high as 76 % to only 35 % [50]. 
Intriguingly, the increase in the surface atomic ratio of MNCs induced by 
the size reduction has a significant effect on their physicochemical 
properties such as electrical potential, melting point, and other optical 
and electrochemical properties [51–53]. For instance, as the size of Au 
NCs changes, their fluorescence emission could be shifted from the UV 
region to the NIR region, accompanied by observable emission of light in 
different colors. [54]. Most importantly, such small-sized metal clusters 
tend to have more exposed enzymatic active sites. Hence, tunable cat­
alytic activity can be achieved through the size dependence of MNCs. 
3.2. Stability 
In addition to optimal size and enzymatic activity, excellent stability 
to avoid deactivation of MNCs upon application is one of the essential 
properties. As mentioned previously, a variety of ligands have been 
proposed as protective agents to stabilize the nanoclusters to avoid ag­
gregation and degradation, thus securing promising stability. The sta­
bilization can be achieved by ligands that alter the orbitals, charge 
distribution, and energy of the metal. Jung et al. [55] found that 
aliphatic thiols give higher electrochemical and thermodynamic stabil­
ity to MNCs than aromatic thiols. Modification on the surface of MNCs 
can also improve their stability. The graphene oxide-Au NCs hybrids 
(GA) exhibited high POD-like activity over a wide pH range [56]. In 
contrast, the activity of unmodified graphene oxide or Au NCs was 
relatively low under neutral conditions. Effective surface modification 
could greatly improve the activity of GA and contribute to stable 
detection under physiological conditions. 
3.3. Mimic enzymatic activity of nanoclusters 
3.3.1. POD-like activity 
PODs are a class of catalyst enzymes for H2O2, in which the H2O2 is 
reduced and the substrate, which acts as an electron donor, is oxidized 
[57]. Since PODs can oxidize some reagents to generate colored prod­
ucts, they have been applied to the detection and monitoring of some 
biological samples, dyes, or heavy metal ions [58–60]. However, natural 
PODs are not easy to store and extract, so the studies of preparing low- 
cost MNCs with POD activity have stimulated the interest of researchers. 
Since Wang et al. [29] demonstrated the POD activity of Au NCs in a 
2011 study, the same enzymatic activity was subsequently demon­
strated for Pt and Cu, respectively [61,62]. In 2013, Hu et al. [61] first 
discovered that BSA-Cu NCs had intrinsic POD catalytic activity and 
could catalyze the oxidation of 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) by 
H2O2 to generate a blue product. Where H2O2 could be adsorbed on the 
surface of Cu NCs, the O–O bond was decomposed to ⋅OH by Cu (I) and 
Cu (0) in Cu NCs, achieving the catalytic reaction. The colorimetric 
analysis of H2O2 and glucose was achieved based on the concentration 
and color-dependent changes of H2O2. Also, it was experimentally 
demonstrated that Cu NCs had high stability and comparable POD cat­
alytic activity compared to natural horseradish POD (HPR). Despite this, 
the limited enzymatic activity of the single metal nanoclusters remains a 
problem to be solved. It was found that the catalytic activity of the 
nanomaterials could be improved by employing β-cyclodextrin (β-CD) as 
N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Chemical Engineering Journal 465 (2023) 142817
5
modulators, and the POD mimetic activity of Cu NCs was enhanced by 
increasing the specific surface area by employing β-CD to improve the 
affinity and specificity [63]. Moreover, the catalytic ability could be 
significantly improved by modifying metal NPs on the surface of MNCs 
to achieve synergistic catalysis [64]. 
3.3.2. OXD-like activity 
Oxidases catalyze oxidation–reduction reactions in which molecular 
oxygen (O2) is used to oxidize substrates into oxidation products, while 
the O2 itself is reduced to water or H2O2 [57]. Some MNCs have been 
proved to have OXD activity and are promising candidates to replace 
oxidases. Yu et al. [65] synthesized ultra-small Pt NCs with OXD-like 
activity using lysozyme as a template, which could achieve catalytic 
oxidation of 2,2′-azino-bis (3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulphonic acid) 
(ABTS) and TMB in the absence of H2O2. At the same time, they pro­
posed that the catalytic activity of Pt-based nanomaterials is highly 
dependent on the particle size, with the smallest size Pt NCs having the 
highest activity. In 2015, BSA-protected Ag NCs with OXD activity were 
synthesized for the detection of Hg (II) and DNA [66]. It was found that 
Hg (II) selectively stimulated the OXD-like activity of the BSA-Ag NCs 
and enhanced the color-emitting response of TMB, with a characteristic 
absorption at 652 nm, so that colorimetric sensing of Hg (II) was ach­
ieved. The mechanism might be that Hg (II) altered the binding energy 
of Ag (0), leading to a change in the catalytic activity of the Ag NCs. In 
addition, Hg (II) could first form a mismatch with thymine (T) and be 
released in the presence of the target DNA, which in turn enhanced the 
colorimetric reaction of TMB, indirectly developing a simple colori­
metric detection method for DNA molecules without complex modifi­
cation and labeling of the probe. 
3.3.3. CAT-like activity 
CAT catalyzes the breakdown of H2O2 into molecular O2, which 
prevents oxidative damage to cells caused by ROS [67]. The simulation 
of CAT activity is achieved by Au NCs in the following manner: Au2+ is 
first reduced to Au+ by H2O2, producing both protons and O2, and then 
H2O2 could bind to oxygen vacancies, oxidizing Au+ to Au2+ and 
releasing H2O. Using the poly (amid amine) (PAMAM) dendrimer as a 
protective and capping agent, Liu et al. [68] synthesized Au NCs with an 
intrinsic CAT activity that exhibited optimal enzymatic activity at 
physiological pH conditions. PAMAM is susceptible to protonation 
under acidic conditions, and this promotes the adsorption of ⋅OH, which 
triggers the CAT-like reaction. It had also been shown that 
metallothionein-stabilized Cu NCs (MT-Cu NCs) had POD-like activity 
[69]. However, in the presence of Pb (II) or Hg (II), the CAT-like activity 
could be converted to POD-like activity, which might be attributed to 
the production of Pb-Cu/Hg-Cu. In fact, most of the reports for the 
detection of analytes are based on the binding of POD-mimicking 
nanoclusters to substrates such as TMB or ABTS. As the exploration of 
MNCs is at a preliminary stage, their application for biomarker detection 
based on CAT-like activity has not been exhaustively reported. However, 
as mentioned above, the CAT-like activity of MNCs could be successfully 
used for linear detection of Pb (II) or Hg (II), so indirect detection of DNA 
macromolecules involved in some diseases (as Hg (II) can mismatch with 
thymine) by CAT activity is still on the agenda. 
3.3.4. SOD-like activity 
SOD is an antioxidant metalloenzyme that catalyzes the superoxide 
anion radicals (O2
⋅-) disproportionation to produce H2O2 and molecular 
O2, which two are important in physiological antioxidation [67]. Su­
peroxide radicals are generated during physiological level metabolism 
or when white blood cells phagocytose invading harmful bacteria. If not 
rapidly eliminated, superoxide radicals can cause damage to tissues and 
organs within the organism. SOD is an indispensable antioxidant 
enzyme that is the first line of resistance to the poisonous effects of ROS 
in living cells [70]. With the development of nanozymes, V2O5 nano­
wires and CeO2 NPs have been proposed to possess intrinsic SOD-like 
activity [71,72]. Niu et al [73] synthesized VN@CNFs by assembling 
vanadium nitride NPs on carbon nanofibers for cascade colorimetric 
detection of O2
⋅-. Firstly O2
⋅- was catalyzed by the SOD-like VN@CNFs to 
generate H2O2, and then the substrate TMB was oxidized by the POD- 
like activity of the nanozyme. However, in a recent study in 2022, Mi 
et al. [74] synthesized red-emitting CS-GSH@Au NCs by using chitosan 
(CS) and GSH as a cross-linker and template, which exhibited intrinsic 
SOD activity and POD activity. The SOD activity was evaluated by a 
typical tetrazolium blue (NBT) chromogenic method and the conversion 
of O2
⋅- to H2O2 was confirmed. Accordingly, a cascade reaction based on 
SOD-like MNCs to detect O2
⋅- is also a direction worth exploring. At the 
same time, nanozymes with SOD activity are often applied in the 
treatment of ROS-based diseases and, in addition, the abnormal 
behavior of ROS in vivo could also be monitored and detected with the 
help of them [73,75]. 
In this section, some common nanozymes based on MNCs are pre­
sented, and in addition, some MNCs with other enzyme-like activities 
such as glucose oxidase (GOx), ascorbate oxidase (AAOx), and gluta­
thione POD (GPx) are also reported, which usually act on exclusive 
substrates such as glucose, ascorbate, and GSH [44,76,77]. Some 
mimetic enzymes and their activities based on MNCs are summarized in 
Table 1. 
4. Detection of biomarkers by MNCs 
4.1. Glucose 
Glucose plays a crucial role in bio-systems and human health, being 
responsible for producing most of the energy needed for successful 
growth and reproduction. Yet many diseases are caused by irregular 
levels of glucose in the blood, and high levels of glucose in the circula­
tion of blood can be responsible for chronic damage [105,106]. Many 
diabetic complications can be prevented by controlling blood glucose 
levels. Therefore, glucose-level monitoring is essential for clinical 
research. There are several modalities used for detecting and monitoring 
glucose levels, such as electrochemical assays, enzymatic assays, and 
fluorometric assays [107–109]. Among these methods, colorimetric 
analysis has been extensively employed for the detection of glucose due 
to its low cost and conversion to naked-eye readability through simple 
color changes [110]. Cho et al. [64] improved the POD activity of Au 
NCs by electrostatically combining the nanozyme with Fe3O4 magnetic 
NPs, and introduced GOx to achieve a highly sensitive colorimetric 
biosensing of glucose through coupling catalysis (Fig. 3). GOx oxidized 
glucose to produce gluconic acid and H2O2, and the obtained H2O2 could 
convert colorless TMB to blue oxTMB catalyzed by Au NCs with POD 
activity. Steady-state kinetic experiments showed that the apparent Km 
value of Fe3O4@Au NCs was significantly lower than that of Au NCs and 
MNPs, which was only one-fifth of their values, demonstrating the sig­
nificant enhanced affinity of Fe3O4@Au NCs. Moreover, Fe3O4@Au NCs 
could maintain stable catalytic activity over a wide temperature range 
from room temperature to 90 ◦C, and more than 80 % of the catalytic 
activity could be maintained after four cycles. Ultimately, the method 
achieved a detection limit of 100 μM and successfully detected the tar­
geted glucose over a linear range of 150–750 μM. However, even though 
the composite nanozyme had good stability, the presence of GOx limited 
its application conditions such as temperature and pH. In another 
experiment, Au NPs were encapsulated by Au NCs to form AuN­
P@AuNCs composite with Gox-like activity [111]. This composite 
combined the POD activity of Au NCs with the GOx activity of Au NPs 
and perfectly preserved the high activity of both, enabling a glucose 
cascade assay without the assistance of natural enzymes. 
4.2. Dopamine 
Dopamine (DA) is an important catecholamine neurotransmitter that 
plays an active role in many physiological processes. Elevated 
N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Chemical Engineering Journal 465 (2023) 142817
6
Table 1 
Representative examples of nanozymes based on MNCs in the last five years.  
MNCs 
Protective agents 
Catalytic type 
Catalytic activity 
Ref. 
Au NCs 
Protamine 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 1.49 mM, Vmax = 2.80 × 10-6 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 0.169 mM, Vmax = 1.84 × 10-6 M s−1 
[78] 
1-methyl-D-tryptophan 
POD 
POD activity peaks at pH 3.0, 25 ◦C. 
[79] 
D-tryptophane methyl 
ester 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 0.057 mM, Vmax = 0.821 × 10-8 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 0.182 mM, Vmax = 0.192 × 10-8 M s−1 
[80] 
Keratin 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 0.042 mM, Vmax = 9.07 × 10-9 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 0.131 mM, Vmax = 7.75 × 10-9 M s−1 
[81] 
D-His 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 72 mM, Vmax = 5.55 × 10-8 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 0.41 mM, Vmax = 7.69 × 10-8 M s−1 
[82] 
Cytidine 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 2.812 mM, Vmax = 15.8 × 10-8 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 1.925 mM, Vmax = 212.3 × 10-8 M s−1 
[83] 
D-trytophan methyl 
ester 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 0.057 mM, Vmax = 0.831 × 10-8 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 0.182 mM, Vmax = 0.192 × 10-8 M s−1 
[80] 
Papain 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 0.41 mM, Vmax = 0.99 × 10-8 M s−1 
[84] 
BSA 
OXD 
TMB: KM = 0.15 mM, Vmax = 6.09 × 10-8 M s−1 
[85] 
Au/Pt NCs 
GSH 
POD 
The optimum temperature was 35 ◦C and the optimum pH was 4.0. 
[86] 
GSH 
POD 
TMB: KM = 0.108 mM, Vmax = 106 × 10-8 M s−1 
[87] 
Cytosine nucleotide 
POD 
The optimum pH was 5 and the most suitable incubation time was 15 min. 
[88] 
NADH 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 160 mM, Vmax = 8.72 × 10-8 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 0.086 mM, Vmax = 6.84 × 10-8 M s−1 
[89] 
GMP 
POD 
The optimum pH was 8. 
[90] 
GMP 
OXD 
TMB: KM = 6.805 mM, Vmax = 253.8 × 10-8 M s−1 
ABTS: KM = 0.1321 mM, Vmax = 17.98 × 10-8 M s−1 
[91] 
Ag NCs 
PEI 
Oxidoreductase 
Ag NCs could catalyze the oxidation–reduction reaction of TMB and Cr6+ with significant color development 
within 1 min (20 min in the absence of Ag NCs). 
[92] 
BSA 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 0.140 mM, Vmax = 1.55 × 10-8 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 0.384 mM, Vmax = 1.53 × 10-8 M s−1 
[93] 
WS2-Ag 
NCs 
BSA 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 0.026 mM, Vmax = 1.32 × 10-8 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 0.112 mM, Vmax = 1.77 × 10-8 M s−1 
Ag/Cu NCs 
GSH 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 0.2327 mM, Vmax = 2.04 × 10-7 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 0.3797 mM, Vmax = 4.14 × 10-7 M s−1 
[94] 
Ag/Pt NCs 
DNA 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 77.51 mM, Vmax = 4.67 × 10-8 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 0.084 mM, Vmax = 3.62 × 10-8 M s−1 
[95] 
Cu NCs 
Pepsin 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 1 mM, Vmax = 0.467 μM s−1 
[96] 
Cu NCs 
Cys 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 2.52 mM, Vmax = 1.68 × 10-7 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 1.125 mM, Vmax = 0.72 × 10-7 M s−1 
[97] 
CAT 
KM = 207.1 mM, Vmax = 418.4 × 10-6 M s−1 
SOD 
IC50 = 1.82 × 10 –4 mol L-1 
AAOx 
In the presence of Cu NCs, the rate of ascorbic acid decline increased rapidly, reaching a plateau within 120 s. 
KM = 0.46 mM, Vmax = 23.5 × 10-7 M s−1 
GSH 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 1.51 mM, Vmax = 3.09 × 10-6 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 0.99 mM, Vmax = 5.28 × 10-6 M s−1 
[44] 
CAT 
– 
SOD 
The calculated SOD activity was 25.6 U mg−1. 
GPx 
H2O2: KM = 0.097 mM, Vmax = 6.781 × 10-6 M s−1 
GSH: KM = 0.913 mM, Vmax = 4.766 × 10-6 M s−1 
CS@Cu 
NCs 
GSH 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 27.3 mM, Vmax = 2.53 × 10-7 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 0.39 mM, Vmax = 1.11 × 10-7 M s−1 
[98] 
Cys 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 54.5 mM, Vmax = 3.95 × 10-7 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 0.72 mM, Vmax = 1.42 × 10-7 M s−1 
Hg2+- 
CuNCs 
Metallothionein 
CAT 
H2O2: KM = 3.45 mM, Vmax = 2.88 × 10-9 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 2.04 mM, Vmax = 1.71 × 10-9 M s−1 
[69] 
Pb2+- 
CuNCs 
Metallothionein 
CAT 
H2O2: KM = 1.08 mM, Vmax = 1.58 × 10-9 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 3.04 mM, Vmax = 6.31 × 10-9 M s−1 
5MT-Cu 
NCs 
GSH 
SOD 
IC50 = 106.4 
[99] 
6MT-Cu 
NCs 
GSH 
SOD 
IC50 = 87.42 
Pt NCs 
GLP 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 2.06 mM, Vmax = 7.51 × 10-8 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 0.17 mM, Vmax = 5.04 × 10-8 M s−1 
[100] 
Lentinan 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 7.1 mM, Vmax = 5.02 × 10-8 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 0.584 mM, Vmax = 13.68 × 10-8 M s−1 
[101] 
PVP 
OXD 
OPD: KM = 0.38 mM, Vmax = 29.02 × 10-8 M s−1 
[102] 
BGP 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 1.5 mM, Vmax = 10.73 × 10-8 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 0.7 mM, Vmax = 175.44 × 10-8 M s−1 
[103] 
Yeast extract 
POD 
H2O2: KM = 3.07 mM, Vmax = 18.17 × 10-8 M s−1 
TMB: KM = 0.096 mM, Vmax = 14.14 × 10-8 M s−1 
[104] 
NADH: Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide disodium salt. 
5MT: 5-methyl-2-thiouracil. 
6MT: 6-methyl-2-thiouracil. 
GMP: Guanosine monophosphate. 
GLP: Ganoderma lucidum polysaccharide. 
BGP: Bitter gourd polysaccharide. 
N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Chemical Engineering Journal 465 (2023) 142817
7
physiological levels of DA can lead to pleasant sensations, but excessive 
production can lead to impaired energy metabolism; a lack of DA can 
cause memory and cognitive disorders of the nervous system, as well as 
other disorders such as Parkinson’s disease and attention deficit disorder 
[112,113]. Therefore, normal levels of DA are essential for the function 
of the body and a rapid and effective method for DA detection is highly 
desirable. Several electrochemical methods have been developed for the 
detection of DA, but some substances were oxidized together at poten­
tials close to the DA, resulting in less specificity of the electrochemical 
response signal [114]. The use of BSA-stabilised Au NCs as a platform for 
highly sensitive and selective fluorescence and colorimetric sensing of 
DA was first proposed by Tao et al. [114]. On the one hand, the in-band 
leap of free electrons of Au NCs caused the surface to exhibit intense 
fluorescence, and the fluorescence intensity of Au NCs was shifted and 
significantly reduced by the addition of DA; on the other hand, Au NCs 
exhibited intrinsic POD activity, and DA could inhibit their POD activity, 
resulting in a gradual decrease in the absorbance of oxTMB at 652 nm. In 
2021, Ma et al. [84] synthesized POD-like Au NCs (P@Au NCs) using 
papain as a capping agent, with the difference that the negatively 
charged DA could trigger the aggregation of positively charged P@Au 
NCs and thus increased their catalytic activity (Fig. 4). The color of 
oxTMB gradually deepened with increasing DA concentration in a good 
linear relationship. The Km and Vmax were also calculated by the 
Michaelis-Menten equation, and the Km value calculated for P@AuNCs 
with TMB as substrate was almost the same as the HRP. There were 
hardly any components that affected the detection of DA in the serum, 
except for streptomycin and hygromycin which had similar structures to 
DA, resulting in a colorimetric sensing method of DA with a detection 
limit of 0.8 μM. 
4.3. Biothiols 
Biothiols, mainly GSH, Cys, and homocysteine (Hcy), are reducing 
species that are present in physiological conditions to maintain the ho­
meostasis of the internal environment and their levels are closely related 
to specific diseases [115]. For example, deficiencies in Cys and GSH are 
often a symptom of diseases such as cardiovascular and neurodegener­
ative diseases, liver damage, and hematopoietic dysfunction [116]. It 
has been shown that the catalytic activity of nanoclusters can be influ­
enced by factors such as size, composition, and surface modifications 
[65]. By inhibiting the POD activity of nanoclusters, Li et al. [86] pro­
posed bimetallic nanozymes Ag/Pt NCs and established a novel colori­
metric method for the detection of Cys (Fig. 5). The mechanism of the 
colorimetric detection for Cys was investigated by XPS and TEM. After 
the addition of Cys to treat Ag/Pt NCs, Pt2+ was reduced to Pt0 and Cys 
was attached to the surface of the nanozyme via Metal-S bond, hindering 
the interaction of nanozyme with H2O2 and the generation of OH radi­
cals. Moreover, TEM showed an increase in diameter and a decrease in 
specific surface area due to the deposition of generated Pt0 on the sur­
face, implying a decrease in catalytic activity. Theoretically, other bio­
thiols markers such as GSH and Hcy, or reduced ascorbic acid (AA) 
would be likely to interfere with the detection of Cys, yet it was sur­
prising to find that Ag/Pt NCs had better selectivity for Cys compared to 
other biothiols. Also, due to the relatively high concentration of Cys in 
human urine, the assay could ignore the interference from other sub­
stances. Another experiment on a similar principle was proposed by 
Jiang et al. [83] for the colorimetric detection of GSH, glutathione di­
sulfide (GSSG), and glutathione reductase (GR). Inhibition to the POD 
activity of cytidine-stabilized Au NCs by GSH led to a decrease in 
absorbance at 652 nm with a LOD of 0.1 mM. Then, as GSSG could be 
oxidized to GSH, a colorimetric platform was established for the 
detection of both GSSG and GR, reaching detection limits of 0.03 mM 
and 0.003 U/mL, respectively. 
4.4. AA 
AA, also called vitamin C, performs an important role in the body’s 
metabolism such as protecting the body from the threat of free radicals 
[103]. AA has antioxidant properties and deficiency in AA can lead to 
the development of many diseases such as scurvy, cancer, and some 
cardiovascular diseases [102]. The human body cannot produce AA it­
self due to the lack of gulonolactone oxidase. Relying on POD activity, 
the ultra-small Pt NCs by using bitter melon polysaccharide as a stabi­
lizer and reducing agent were synthesized by a green method and 
enabled the colorimetric detection of AA [103]. The HRTEM image 
showed that the Pt NCs were spherical, with a size of about 0.83 nm. The 
smaller size led to a larger specific surface area inside the Pt NCs and 
thus increased their catalytic activity. To investigate the catalytic 
mechanism of Pt NCs, the fluorescent probe terephthalic acid (TA) was 
utilized to test the production of –OH radicals and the fluorescence in­
tensity of TA mixed with H2O2 and Pt NCs was as high as 1629.0, which 
was tens or even hundreds of times higher compared to the other groups. 
The O–O bond of H2O2 could be decomposed into two –OH radicals, 
which in turn reacted with TMB to form oxTMB. oxTMB was then 
reduced to colorless TMB by reducing AA, causing a linear correlation 
between its concentration and the absorbance of oxTMB at 652 nm. 
However, the detection of AA based on POD activity was often interfered 
by reducing substances, such as GSH, Cys, etc. Liu and Pang [76] used 
DNA as a template to synthesize red-emitting Au/Ag NC (DNA-Au/Ag 
NC), whose emitted light could be burst by AA. Rapid detection of AA 
and AAOx by fluorescence could be achieved by the addition of AAOx. In 
2020, homogeneous Cu NCs were synthesized by Liu et al. [97] with four 
mimetic-enzyme activities including POD, CAT, AAOx, and SOD. The 
oxidation products of AAOx reacted with OPD to produce fluorescent 
substances and the fluorescence intensity increased with increasing AA 
concentrations. It was clear that colorimetric sensing based on AAOx 
could greatly improve selectivity and avoid the interference of reducing 
substances. 
4.5. Biomacromolecules 
Proteases are involved in the control of many important physiolog­
ical and pathological processes in the body, and their activity is closely 
linked to disease. Acid phosphatase (ACP) is a universal hydrolytic 
enzyme found mainly in body fluids and tissues at low normal levels, but 
its expression is abnormal in the presence of disease or enzyme disorders 
[89]. Although various colorimetric methods have been developed for 
the monitoring of ACP, their catalytic products exhibit light absorption 
only under alkaline conditions, which is contrary to the optimal pH of 
ACP and increases the complexity of the test. In 2017, Deng et al. [117] 
proposed that CS could exhibit excellent stability and enhance the OXD- 
like activity of Pt NPs, and the optimal color-developing condition was 
in an acidic medium that could well adapt to the optimal pH of ACP 
(Fig. 6). Zheng et al. [89] synthesized Au/Pd NCs and demonstrated that 
they had a superior enzymatic activity than the two monometallics 
(Fig. 6). Interestingly, they used NADH as a reducing and stabilizing 
agent for the first time to synthesize bimetallic nanoclusters, which not 
only reflected shorter growth time but also showed excellent POD ac­
tivity. In the normal course, Au/Pd NCs can catalyze the generation of 
–OH from H2O2, which oxidizes TMB to oxTMB. However, ACP can 
catalyze the generation of AA from 2- phosphate -L- ascorbic acid tri­
sodium salt (AAP), which competitively binds –OH, thereby retarding 
the oxidation of TMB. At pH 4.0, the A652 nm signal showed a linear 
relationship with ACP activity in the range of 1–14 U/L, with a detection 
limit of 0.53 U/L. Based on the same principle, alkaline phosphatase 
(ALP) was also detected through NCs such as Au NCs [118]. However, 
compared to ACP, its detection tended to be more complex as its hy­
drolysis usually occurred under alkaline conditions. Therefore, an 
alkaline buffer could be used firstly to promote hydrolysis, and then the 
color development of oxTMB could be achieved by an excessive addition 
N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Chemical Engineering Journal 465 (2023) 142817
8
of acetate buffer. In addition to proteins or enzymes, enzyme-like 
colorimetric sensing based on MNCs has also been used for RNA 
detection. Dong et al. [119] found that electrochemical miRNA bio­
sensors down to 67 fM were obtained by combining the functional 
oligonucleotide probes with Ag NCs that had metallo-mimetic 
enzymatic activity to catalyze the reduction of H2O2. Besides, some nano 
sensors based on MNCs to achieve ultra-sensitive detection of proteins, 
antigens, and hormones by the naked eyes have also been developed. 
Starting from a sandwich structure of antibody-antigen (i.e., analyte)- 
antibody, Zhao et al. [120] achieved quantitative detection of analytes 
Fig. 3. (A) Schematic diagram of colorimetric detection for glucose by using nanohybrids. (B) Characterization curve, stability, and reproducibility examination of 
the catalytic ability of Fe3O4@Au NCs. (C) Colorimetric detection of glucose by Fe3O4@Au NCs. Reproduced from Ref. [64], Copyright (2017), with permission 
from Scitation. 
Fig. 4. (A) Scheme for colorimetric detection of DA by P@Au NCs. (B) TEM image of P@Au NCs. (C) Size distribution of P@AuNCs. (D) Selectivity study of P@Au 
NCs for DA detection. (1. DA; 2. L-Leu; 3. L-Met; 4. L-Pro; 5. L-Glu; 6. L-Ser; 7. L-Phe; 8. L-His; 9. L-Thr; 10. Ca2+; 11. Al3+; 12. Na+; 13. Zn2+; 14. Mn2+; 15. K+; 16. 
Mg2+; 17. glucose; 18. ascorbic acid; 19. uric acid; 20. streptomycin A; 21. oxytetracycline) (E) Examination of the POD activity of P@Au NCs. Reproduced with 
permission from Ref. [84]. Copyright (2021) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Chemical Engineering Journal 465 (2023) 142817
9
by using Au NCs to affect the synthesis of Au NPs and thus appearing 
color differences. The Au NCs immobilized on the outer antibody 
increased with the number of target molecules, thus exerting a POD-like 
activity to consume H2O2 (competitively reducing the reduction of 
chloroauric acid) and achieving a red-to-purple transition. The sandwich 
structure enabled the detection of biomolecules such as breast cancer 
antigens and thyroid hormones with a low LOD. In another study [121], 
Ag/Pt NCs modified anti-BSA IgG could be used to quantify BSA in a 
direct sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). With the 
increase of BSA, quantification could be achieved by measuring the 
oxidation rate of TMB in a relatively short time. The detection limit has 
been validated to be 5-fold higher compared to HPR-IgG. Further, 
magnetic nanoclusters were also developed to detect certain proteins 
such as streptococcus pneumoniae hemolysin by lateral flow immuno­
assay [122]. 
Colorimetric sensing of some biomarkers by MNCs is summarized in 
Table 2. 
5. Sensing platform based on colorimetric detection 
The greatest advantage of the colorimetric method is its simplicity 
and low cost, as the detection of markers can be achieved by visual 
observation of color changes alone, often without the need for additional 
instruments and sophisticated equipment. At present, colorimetric 
detection can be realized through some simple basic platforms. 
5.1. Smartphone based on colorimetric detection 
With the development of science and technology, smartphones have 
become the device of choice for instant colorimetric detection due to 
their superior photographic performance and portability. Generally 
speaking, the system extracts the color information after the probe re­
action by using the smartphone and sends the color information to the 
remote server for discriminant analysis, and finally, the remote server 
returns the discriminant result to the mobile phone to complete rapid 
and real-time colorimetric detection. Yue et al. [135] acquired the color 
change of nanozyme relative to DA under ultraviolet light through the 
“Color Grab” app and converted it into R, G, and B parameters, realizing 
a good linear relationship between the color intensity and DA concen­
trations in the range of 1–10 mM (Fig. 7 (A)). Huang et al. [136] pre­
pared the laccase mimetic nanozyme CuCoFe-LDH to catalyze the 
oxidation of chromoblastoma biomarkers to generate color development 
products. The results were given by using an application to read out HSV 
(Hue, Saturation, Value) and establish a corresponding function through 
a well-established standard color database. In conclusion, the colori­
metric sensing platform based on a smartphone is undoubtedly simpler, 
more efficient, real-time, and faster, and it can avoid the influence of 
brightness and illumination on color-by-color correction technology. 
5.2. Paper sensor based on colorimetric detection 
In 2007, Martinez et al. [137] used filter paper as the base material 
for making paper-based colorimetric detection devices. The colorimetric 
platform was small in size, disposable, and easy to carry. Most of the 
commonly used paper substrates are porous and hydrophilic, so paper- 
based colorimetric detection devices often require the construction of 
a hydrophobic barrier followed by the deposition of detection reagents. 
Fakhri et al. [128] obtained Ag/Pt NCs with POD activity to enable 
miRNA-21 detection based on their inhibition to POD activity. In par­
allel, they fabricated a Y-shaped microfluidic paper-based assay device 
(μPADs), which was combined with a smartphone and Image J software 
to determine relevant concentrations. By varying the length and width 
of the hydrophilic channels, the flow rate of the liquid could be effec­
tively controlled and it was advantageous to use this detection platform 
when sample volumes were limited as the device typically required 
fewer samples. As shown in Fig. 7 (B), different reagents were added 
dropwise to different positions and finally concentrated above to 
develop the color. The color would gradually become lighter with the 
increasing miRNA-21 concentrations from the control, and the detection 
limit was up to 0.6 pM. Another study utilized laser irradiation to ach­
ieve the hydrophobic properties of the paper and a polyvinyl chloride 
(PVC) sheet to keep the reagents in place to prevent leakage from the 
bottom. A drop of nanozyme and sample were placed at the top, then the 
chromogen and H2O2 at the bottom flowed capillary to the top to induce 
the formation of the blue product. This study was able to detect bacterial 
cells in food very quickly within five minutes by using DNA-Au/Pt NCs. 
Fig. 5. (A) The presence of Cys reduced the absorbance of oxTMB at 652 nm. (B) The particle size of Ag/Pt NCs without the presence of Cys. (C) The particle size of 
Ag/Pt NCs in the presence of Cys. (D) Changes in the absorption spectra of Ag/Pt NCs with increasing Cys concentration. (E) Linearity of A652nm versus logarithmic 
concentration of Cys. (F) Comparison of the inhibition to the catalytic activity of Au/Pt NCs by various interferents. Reproduced from Ref. [86], Copyright (2021), 
with permission from Elsevier. 
N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Chemical Engineering Journal 465 (2023) 142817
10
5.3. Microneedle based on colorimetric detection 
The microneedle patch is typically between 100 and 2000 µm in 
length and can be easily inserted into the skin. Initially, it was used 
almost exclusively in cosmetic applications, and its application in 
biomedicine has gradually attracted the interest of many researchers in 
recent years. There are various types of microneedles such as solid 
microneedles, hollow microneedles, soluble microneedles, and hydrogel 
microneedles. Among them, hydrogel microneedles can be used for the 
detection of targeted biomarkers because they can be swollen in the skin 
without dissolving. Xu et al. [105] developed a microneedle patch with 
good swelling properties by using polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and PVP, 
which could be used to extract interstitial fluid (ISF) from the body by 
piercing the skin, thus enabling the detection of glucose (Fig. 7 (C)). 
Zhang et al. [138] encapsulated polypyrrole NPs with POD activity into 
microneedles to achieve a wearable microneedle colorimetric patch for 
in situ detection of uric acid and combined with a smartphone to enable 
instant detection (Fig. 7 (D, E)). The microneedle patch contained a 
reactive layer at the tip of the needle containing a swellable PVA gel and 
the uricase. Once the microneedle was inserted into the skin, the PVA 
hydrogel was pumped out of the ISF where the uric acid was oxidized by 
the uricase to produce H2O2. And H2O2 further reached to the display 
layer containing the color developer TMB and the nanozyme polypyrrole 
to reveal a blue color that could be recognized by the naked eyes. 
6. Conclusion and prospect 
All in all, there has been a great deal of interest and rapid develop­
ment of nanozyme-based science and technology in recent years. In this 
paper, we summarize a comprehensive overview of mimetic enzyme 
activity-like MNCs, including their POD-like activity, OXD-like activity, 
CAT-like activity, and SOD-like activity. And the applications of MNCs in 
the colorimetric detection of some common biomarkers were summa­
rized. Compared with other classes of enzyme materials, MNCs have the 
following advantages: i) Easy and safe synthesis. Some nanozymes (such 
as Fe-based nanozymes and metal-based organic frameworks) often 
need to be prepared at high temperature (greater than100 ◦C) and high 
pressure for a long time, while MNCs are generally synthesized in water 
at room temperature and ordinary pressure without extreme and 
dangerous conditions; ii) Compared to common nanozymes, MNCs with 
small particle size (~2 nm) tend to have higher enzymatic activity due to 
their larger specific surface area. And once applied to the human body, 
their smaller size leads to higher biocompatibility and degradability; iii) 
MNCs tend to have excellent enzymatic activity along with different 
color luminescence properties, which can be effectively implemented in 
a fluorescent colorimetric dual sensing mode to improve the accuracy of 
detection. Combining the unique properties of MNCs such as fluores­
cence and chirality with enzyme-like properties is expected to further 
expand their applications in the biological field. And by modulating the 
properties of MNCs such as particle size, charge, and surface free energy, 
it is expected to achieve precise modulation of their enzyme-like activ­
ities. Finally, it is also interesting that they serve as biocatalysts for the 
treatment and monitoring of several diseases in vivo, benefiting from 
their smaller size and higher biosafety. 
However, the reduced metal ions usually result in large NPs rather 
than small MNCs due to their aggregation, which is also a disadvantage 
that cannot be denied. To date, many researchers have focused on the 
stable synthesis of metal nanoclusters, and methods for surface modifi­
cation and enhancement of the enzymatic activity of MNCs have been 
less reported so far compared to the fully studied nanozymes. Conse­
quently, MNCs still have the following problems to be solved for prac­
tical applications. Firstly, it is still difficult for MNCs to achieve natural 
enzyme activity when they are in the development stage. Therefore, it is 
still worthwhile to explore some methods by modifications or doping to 
Fig. 6. (A) Scheme of the interaction between CS and Pt NPs. (B) Mechanism diagram of CS-Pt NPs for ACP detection. (C) The inhibition of absorbance at 652 nm 
from AA at different concentrations. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [117]. Copyright (2017) Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) Mechanism diagram of Au/Pd 
NCs for ACP detection. (E) A plot of ACP concentrations versus the absorbance at 652 nm. (F) Graph of the selectivity of Au/Pd NCs for ACP. Reproduced from 
Ref. [89], Copyright (2020), with permission from Elsevier. 
N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Chemical Engineering Journal 465 (2023) 142817
11
improve the affinity of MNCs. For example, chitosan can improve the 
affinity of Cu NCs and increase the catalytic activity more than twofold 
[98]. Secondly, MNCs often need the participation of natural enzymes to 
detect some specific biomarkers. For example, glucose oxidase or uricase 
still needs to be added to detect glucose and uric acid. Although the 
glutathione POD activity of Cu NCs has been reported, no studies have 
been conducted to achieve cascade reactions of nanozymes using single 
MNCs without the participation of natural enzymes. As a result, there is 
still a gap between the studies on MNCs and NPs. Moreover, effectively 
combining nanomaterials and natural enzymes without weakening the 
activity of either becomes a critical issue. Another problem is that the 
mechanism of the enzyme-like activity of MNCs is currently unclear. 
Most research mechanisms only propose that the active site on the 
surface of MNCs can catalyze specific substances. However, synthetic 
conditions such as reductant, temperature, and pH can affect the activity 
of MNCs. Surprisingly, some substances such as metal ions or biological 
macromolecules can effectively improve or inhibit the activity, there­
fore, there still needs more efforts to reveal the potential mechanisms 
experimentally and theoretically. In conclusion, the enzyme-like activity 
of MNCs is both an opportunity and a challenge. More sensitive and 
highly selective detection is waiting for every-one to explore, and the 
mechanism of MNCs is waiting for scientific researches and explanations 
to achieve more advanced MNCs-based detection sensors. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Table 2 
Characteristics of reported biosensors based on MNCs.  
Biomarkers 
Sensing 
platforms 
Sensor 
characteristics 
Practical 
applications 
Ref. 
Cys 
GSH-Au/ 
Pt NCs 
LOD: 0.154 μM 
LR: 0.5–30 μM 
Artificial 
urine and 
serum 
[86] 
DNA-Ag/ 
Pt NCs 
LOD: 2.0 nM 
LR: 5–500 nM 
Serum 
[95] 
Glucose 
Keratin- 
Cu2+/Au 
NCs 
LOD: 0.26 μM 
LR: 1.6–800 μM 
Serum 
[81] 
WS2/BSA- 
Ag NCs 
LOD: 13 nM 
LR: 0.03–20 μM 
Serum 
[93] 
Pepsin-Cu 
NCs 
LOD: 7.56 nM 
LR: 0–1 mM 
– 
[96] 
Lentinan- 
Pt NCs 
LOD: 1.79 μM 
LR: 5–1000 μM 
Serum and 
urine 
[101] 
Yeast 
extract-Pt 
NCs 
LOD: 0.28 μM 
LR: 0–200 μM 
Serum 
[104] 
GMP-Au/ 
Pt NCs 
LOD: 11 μM 
LR: 0.05–0.4 
mM 
Serum 
[90] 
DNA-Cu/ 
Ag NCs 
LOD: 9.38 μM 
LR: 0.1–0.7 mM 
Serum 
[123] 
Fe3O4-Au 
NCs 
LOD: 100 μM 
LR: 150–750 μM 
Serum 
[64] 
GSH-Au/ 
Pt NCs 
LOD: 2.4 μM 
LR: 5–55 μM 
Serum 
[124] 
AA 
DNA-Au/ 
Ag NC 
LOD: 0.0048 U/ 
mL 
LR: 0.01–0.20 
U/mL 
Serum 
[76] 
BSA- 
AgNCs 
LOD: 0.16 μM 
LR: 2.0–50 μM 
Vitamin C 
products 
[125] 
PVP-Pt 
NCs 
LOD: 1.17 μM 
LR: 2–50 μM 
BSA, tablet, 
and beverage 
[102] 
BGP- Pt 
NCs 
LOD: 0.191 μM 
LR: 2–100 μM 
Vitamin C 
tablets 
[103] 
GSH 
Cys-Cu 
NCs 
LOD: 0.89 nM 
LR: 1–150 μM 
GSH tablets 
[97] 
GSH-Au 
NCs 
LOD: 420 nM 
LR: 2–25 μM 
Cell samples 
[126] 
miRNA 
DNA-Cu 
NCs 
LOD: 0.6 pM 
LR: 1.0 pM-10.0 
nM 
Human blood 
plasma 
[127] 
DNA- Ag/ 
Pt NCs 
LOD: 0.6 pM 
LR: 1–700 pM 
Urine 
[128] 
DA 
Papain-Au 
NCs 
LOD: 0.8 μM 
LR: 2.0–25.0 μM 
Rat serum 
[84] 
GLP-Pt 
NCs 
LOD: 0.66 μM 
LR: 1–100 μM 
Serum 
[100] 
Xanthine 
CIN- 
AgNPs 
LOD: 0.48 μM 
LR: 1–28 μM 
– 
[129] 
DTT-BSA- 
Cu NCs 
LOD: 3.8 × 10−7 
M 
LR: 5.0 × 10−7 
to 1.0 × 10−4 M 
Serum 
[130] 
Choline 
CS@GSH- 
Cu NCs 
LOD: 6.5 μM 
LR: 20–150 μM 
Milk 
[98] 
Acetylcholinesterase 
(AChE) 
CS@GSH- 
Cu NCs 
LOD: 3.3 mU 
mL−1 
LR: 10–120 mU 
mL−1 
Serum 
ACP 
NADH- 
Au/Pt NCs 
LOD: 0.53 U L-1 
LR: 1–14 U L-1 
Serum 
[89] 
ALP 
BSA-Au 
NCs 
LOD: 0.26 mU 
mL−1 
LR: 1.0–6.0 mU 
mL−1 
Serum 
[118] 
Pyrophosphate (PPi) 
Cu2+-Au 
NCs 
LOD: 0.49 nM 
LR: 
0.51–30,000 nM 
Human urine 
[131] 
Heparinase 
BSA-Au 
NCs 
LOD: 0.06 μg 
mL−1 
Serum 
[132]  
Table 2 (continued) 
Biomarkers 
Sensing 
platforms 
Sensor 
characteristics 
Practical 
applications 
Ref. 
LR: 0.1–3 μg 
mL−1 
GSH 
Cytidine- 
Au NCs 
LOD: 0.01 mM 
LR: 0–0.4 mM 
– 
[83] 
GSSG 
LOD: 0.03 mM 
LR: 0–2.5 mM 
GR 
LOD: 0.003 U/ 
mL 
LR: 0–0.2 U/mL 
Citrate 
Cys-Au 
NCs 
LOD: 0.1 μM 
LR: 0.5–1000 
μM 
Human urine 
[46] 
Thrombin 
DNA-Ag/ 
Pt NCs 
LOD: 2.6 nM 
LR: 1–50 mM 
Serum 
[41] 
Trypsin 
BSA-Au 
NCs 
LOD: 0.6 μg/mL 
Human urine 
[133] 
DNA MTase 
DNA-Ag/ 
Pt NCs 
LOD: 0.05 U/mL 
LR: 0.5–10 U/ 
mL 
– 
[42] 
α-amylase 
Starch-Cu/ 
Au NCs 
LOD: 0.04 U/mL 
LR: 0.1–10 U/ 
mL 
Serum 
[134] 
Breast cancer antigen 
15–3 
Au NCs- 
IgG 
LOD: 7.52 ×
10–14 U/mL 
LR: 5 × 10–10 U/ 
mL-5 × 10–12 U/ 
mL 
Breast cancer 
serum 
samples 
[120] 
3,5,3′-L- 
triiodothyronine 
LOD: 2.0 ×
10–15 mg/mL 
LR: 2 × 10–12-2 
× 10–14 mg/mL  
Methamphetamine 
LOD: 2.3 ×
10–18 mg/mL 
LR: 1.15 ×
10–10-2.3 × 10–9 
mg/mL 
Human blood 
samples 
CIN: cinnamon’s phytochemicals. 
DTT: dithiothreitol. 
N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Chemical Engineering Journal 465 (2023) 142817
12
Data availability 
No data was used for the research described in the article. 
References: 
[1] R.T. Liu, X.Y. Ye, T.H. Cui, Recent Progress of Biomarker Detection Sensors, 
Research 2020 (2020) 7949037. 
[2] H. Karimi-Maleh, Y. Orooji, F. Karimi, M. Alizadeh, M. Baghayeri, J. Rouhi, 
S. Tajik, H.D. Beitollahi, S. Agarwal, V.K. Gupta, S. Rajendran, A. Ayati, L. Fu, A. 
L. Sanati, B. Tanhaei, F. Sen, M. Shabani-nooshabadi, P.N. Asrami, A. Al-Othman, 
A critical review on the use of potentiometric based biosensors for biomarkers 
detection, Biosens. Bioelectron. 184 (2021), 113252. 
[3] S.J. Wang, S.Y. Chen, K.S. Shang, X.Y. Gao, X. Wang, Sensitive electrochemical 
detection of cholesterol using a portable paper sensor based on the synergistic 
effect of cholesterol oxidase and nanoporous gold, Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 189 
(2021) 356–362. 
[4] H. Wei, L. Gao, K. Fan, J. Liu, J. He, X. Qu, S. Dong, E. Wang, X. Yan, Nanozymes: 
A clear definition with fuzzy edges, Nano Today 40 (2021), 101269. 
[5] L. Gao, J. Zhuang, L. Nie, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang, N. Gu, T. Wang, J. Feng, D. Yang, 
S. Perrett, X. Yan, Intrinsic peroxidase-like activity of ferromagnetic 
nanoparticles, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2 (9) (2007) 577–583. 
[6] K. Lv, L. Wang, Y. Ma, F. Zhang, W. Guo, K. Yu, F. Qu, H. Lin, Biodegradation Mn- 
CoS@carbon di-shell nanoheterostructure with enhanced nanozyme-mediated 
phototherapy, Biomaterials Advances 136 (2022), 212778. 
[7] R. Zhang, C. Liu, R. Zhao, Y. Du, D. Yang, H. Ding, G. Yang, S. Gai, F. He, P. Yang, 
Engineering oxygen vacancy of MoOx nanoenzyme by Mn doping for dual-route 
cascaded catalysis mediated high tumor eradication, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 623 
(2022) 155–167. 
[8] K. Yan, C. Mu, C. Zhang, Q. Xu, Z. Xu, D. Wang, X. Jing, L. Meng, Pt nanoenzyme 
decorated yolk-shell nanoplatform as an oxygen generator for enhanced multi- 
modality imaging-guided phototherapy, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 616 (2022) 
759–768. 
[9] H. Xu, Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, S. Wang, Tungsten disulfide nanoflowers with 
multi-nanoenzyme activities for the treatment of acute liver injury, J. Colloid 
Interface Sci. 625 (2022) 544–554. 
[10] Z. Wang, Y. Zhao, Y. Hou, G. Tang, R. Zhang, Y. Yang, X. Yan, K. Fan, 
A Thrombin-Activated Peptide-Templated Nanozyme for Remedying Ischemic 
Stroke Via Thrombolytic and Neuroprotective Actions, Advanced materials 
(Deerfield Beach, Fla.) (2023) e2210144. 
[11] J. Yang, R. Zhang, H. Zhao, H. Qi, J. Li, J.-F. Li, X. Zhou, A. Wang, K. Fan, X. Yan, 
T. Zhang, Bioinspired copper single-atom nanozyme as a superoxide dismutase- 
like antioxidant for sepsis treatment, Exploration 2 (4) (2022) 20210267. 
[12] C. Liu, W. Fan, W.-X. Cheng, Y. Gu, Y. Chen, W. Zhou, X.-F. Yu, M. Chen, M. Zhu, 
K. Fan, Q.-Y. Luo, Red Emissive Carbon Dot Superoxide Dismutase Nanozyme for 
Bioimaging and Ameliorating Acute Lung Injury, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2213856 
(2023). 
[13] R. Tang, X. Xia, X. Zhang, H. Jiang, B. Wang, P. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Tang, 
Y. Zhou, Synergistic function of Au NPs/GeO2 nanozymes with enhanced 
peroxidase-like activity and SERS effect to detect choline iodide, Spectrochimica 
Acta Part a-Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy 266 (2022), 120467. 
[14] Z.Q. Yan, H. Yuan, Q. Zhao, L. Xing, X.Y. Zheng, W.G. Wang, Y.L. Zhao, Y. Yu, 
L. Hu, W.L. Yao, Recent developments of nanoenzyme-based colorimetric sensors 
for heavy metal detection and the interaction mechanism, Analyst 145 (9) (2020) 
3173–3187. 
[15] W. Gao, J. He, L. Chen, X. Meng, Y. Ma, L. Cheng, K. Tu, X. Gao, C. Liu, M. Zhang, 
K. Fan, D.-W. Pang, X. Yan, Deciphering the catalytic mechanism of superoxide 
dismutase activity of carbon dot nanozyme, Nat. Commun. 14 (1) (2023) 160. 
[16] H.-H. Deng, L.-N. Zhang, S.-B. He, A.-L. Liu, G.-W. Li, X.-H. Lin, X.-H. Xia, 
W. Chen, Methionine-directed fabrication of gold nanoclusters with yellow 
fluorescent emission for Cu2+ sensing, Biosens. Bioelectron. 65 (2015) 397–403. 
[17] Y. Noh, E.-J. Jo, H. Mun, Y.-D. Ahn, M.-G. Kim, Homogeneous and selective 
detection of cadmium ions by forming fluorescent cadmium-protein nanoclusters, 
Chemosphere 174 (2017) 524–530. 
[18] Y. Guo, C. Yang, Y. Zhang, T. Tao, Nanomaterials for fluorescent detection of 
curcumin, Spectrochimica Acta Part a-Molecular and Biomolecular, Spectroscopy 
265 (2022), 120359. 
[19] N. Xu, S. Jin, L. Wang, Metal nanoparticles-based nanoplatforms for colorimetric 
sensing: A review, Rev. Anal. Chem. 40 (1) (2021) 1–11. 
[20] X. Meng, I. Zare, X. Yan, K. Fan, Protein-protected metal nanoclusters: An 
emerging ultra-small nanozyme, Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews-Nanomedicine 
and Nanobiotechnology 12 (3) (2020) e1602. 
[21] Z. Liu, Z. Wu, Q. Yao, Y. Cao, O.J.H. Chai, J. Xie, Correlations between the 
fundamentals and applications of ultrasmall metal nanoclusters: Recent advances 
in catalysis and biomedical applications, Nano Today 36 (2021), 101053. 
[22] D.M. Chevrier, R. Yang, A. Chatt, P. Zhang, Bonding properties of thiolate- 
protected gold nanoclusters and structural analogs from X-ray absorption 
spectroscopy, Nanotechnology Reviews 4 (2) (2015) 193–206. 
[23] J. Yan, B.K. Teo, N. Zheng, Surface Chemistry of Atomically Precise Coinage- 
Metal Nanoclusters: From Structural Control to Surface Reactivity and Catalysis, 
Acc. Chem. Res. 51 (12) (2018) 3084–3093. 
Fig. 7. (A) Smartphone sensing platform for colorimetric detection of DA. Reproduced from Ref. [135], Copyright (2022), with permission from American Chemical 
Society. (B) Paper-based microfluidic device for detection of mi-RNA21. (C) Scheme of hydrogel microneedle extraction of ISF. Reproduced with permission from 
Ref. [105]. Copyright (2022) Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) Wearable microneedle colorimetric patch combined with a smartphone for detection of uric acid. (E) 
The chromogenic response of microneedle patch sensor. Reproduced from Ref. [138], Copyright (2022), with permission from Elsevier. 
N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Chemical Engineering Journal 465 (2023) 142817
13
[24] A. Saheb, J.A. Smith, M. Josowicz, J. Janata, D.R. Baer, M.H. Engelhard, 
Controlling size of gold clusters in polyaniline from top-down and from bottom- 
up, J. Electroanal. Chem. 621 (2) (2008) 238–244. 
[25] T.Y. Zhou, Q.H. Yao, T.T. Zhao, X. Chen, One-pot synthesis of fluorescent DHLA- 
stabilized Cu nanoclusters for the determination of H2O2, Talanta 141 (2015) 
80–85. 
[26] C.-C. Huang, C.-T. Chen, Y.-C. Shiang, Z.-H. Lin, H.-T. Chang, Synthesis of 
Fluorescent Carbohydrate-Protected Au Nanodots for Detection of Concanavalin 
A and Escherichia coli, Anal. Chem. 81 (3) (2009) 875–882. 
[27] B.-K. Pong, H.I. Elim, J.-X. Chong, W. Ji, B.L. Trout, J.-Y. Lee, New insights on the 
nanoparticle growth mechanism in the citrate reduction of Gold(III) salt: 
Formation of the au nanowire intermediate and its nonlinear optical properties, 
J. Phys. Chem. C 111 (17) (2007) 6281–6287. 
[28] I.M. Khan, S. Niazi, L. Yue, Y. Zhang, I. Pasha, M.K.I. Khan, W. Akhtar, A. Mohsin, 
M.F.J. Chughati, Z. Wang, Research update of emergent gold nanoclusters: A 
reinforced approach towards evolution, synthesis mechanism and application, 
Talanta 241 (2022), 123228. 
[29] X.X. Wang, Q. Wu, Z. Shan, Q.M. Huang, BSA-stabilized Au clusters as peroxidase 
mimetics for use in xanthine detection, Biosens. Bioelectron. 26 (8) (2011) 
3614–3619. 
[30] D. Hu, Z. Sheng, S. Fang, Y. Wang, D. Gao, P. Zhang, P. Gong, Y. Ma, L. Cai, Folate 
Receptor-Targeting Gold Nanoclusters as Fluorescence Enzyme Mimetic 
Nanoprobes for Tumor Molecular Colocalization Diagnosis, Theranostics 4 (2) 
(2014) 142–153. 
[31] Y. Chen, Y. Wang, C. Wang, W. Li, H. Zhou, H. Jiao, Q. Lin, C. Yu, Papain-directed 
synthesis of luminescent gold nanoclusters and the sensitive detection of Cu2+, 
J. Colloid Interface Sci. 396 (2013) 63–68. 
[32] T. Zhou, Y. Huang, W. Li, Z. Cai, F. Luo, C.J. Yang, X. Chen, Facile synthesis of 
red-emitting lysozyme-stabilized Ag nanoclusters, Nanoscale 4 (17) (2012) 
5312–5315. 
[33] G. Zhang, R. Wang, L. Shi, C. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhou, C. Dong, G. Li, S. Shuang, 
Aggregation/assembly induced emission based on silk fibroin-templated 
fluorescent copper nanoclusters for “turn-on” detection of S2, Sensors and 
Actuators B-Chemical 279 (2019) 361–368. 
[34] D.J. Joshi, L. Hlui, N.I. Malek, R.B. Muthukumaran, S.K. Kailasa, Microwave- 
Assisted Synthesis of Red Emitting Copper Nanoclusters Using Trypsin as a Ligand 
for Sensing of Pb2+ And Hg2+ Ions in Water and Tobacco Samples, Appl. 
Spectrosc. 76 (10) (2022) 1234–1245. 
[35] H. Kawasaki, K. Hamaguchi, I. Osaka, R. Arakawa, ph-Dependent Synthesis of 
Pepsin-Mediated Gold Nanoclusters with Blue Green and Red Fluorescent 
Emission, Adv. Funct. Mater. 21 (18) (2011) 3508–3515. 
[36] M. Cui, Y. Zhao, Q. Song, Synthesis, optical properties and applications of ultra- 
small luminescent gold nanoclusters, Trac-Trends in Analytical, Chemistry 57 
(2014) 73–82. 
[37] Z. Zhang, S. Li, P. Huang, J. Feng, F.-Y. Wu, Colorimetric and fluorometric 
aggregation-based heparin assay by using gold nanoclusters and gold 
nanoparticles, Microchim. Acta 186 (12) (2019) 790. 
[38] J. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Liu, W. Liu, F. Lu, Z. Yuan, C. Lu, Gold Nanocluster- 
Encapsulated Hyperbranched Polyethyleneimine for Selective and Ratiometric 
Dopamine Analyses by Enhanced Self-Polymerization, Frontiers in Chemistry 10 
(2022), 928607. 
[39] Y. Cui, X. Lai, B. Liang, Y. Liang, H. Sun, L. Wang, Polyethyleneimine-Stabilized 
Platinum Nanoparticles as Peroxidase Mimic for Colorimetric Detection of 
Glucose, Acs Omega 5 (12) (2020) 6800–6808. 
[40] X.L. Liu, M.M. Tian, C.Y. Li, F.S. Tian, Polyvinylpyrrolidone-stabilized Pt 
nanoclusters as robust oxidase mimics for selective detection of ascorbic acid, 
Colloids and Surfaces a-Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects 625 (2021), 
126985. 
[41] C. Zheng, A.X. Zheng, B. Liu, X.L. Zhang, Y. He, J. Li, H.H. Yang, G.N. Chen, One- 
pot synthesized DNA-templated Ag/Pt bimetallic nanoclusters as peroxidase 
mimics for colorimetric detection of thrombin, Chem. Commun. 50 (86) (2014) 
13103–13106. 
[42] H.A. Kermani, M. Hosseini, A. Miti, M. Dadmehr, G. Zuccheri, S. Hosseinkhani, M. 
R. Ganjali, A colorimetric assay of DNA methyltransferase activity based on 
peroxidase mimicking of DNA template Ag/Pt bimetallic nanoclusters, Anal. 
Bioanal. Chem. 410 (20) (2018) 4943–4952. 
[43] C.T. Chen, W.J. Chen, C.Z. Liu, L.Y. Chang, Y.C. Chen, Glutathione-bound gold 
nanoclusters for selective-binding and detection of glutathione S-transferase- 
fusion proteins from cell lysates, Chem. Commun. 48 (2009) 7515–7517. 
[44] Y. Peng, Y. Ren, H. Zhu, Y. An, B. Chang, T. Sun, Ultrasmall copper nanoclusters 
with multi-enzyme activities, Rsc Advances 11 (24) (2021) 14517–14526. 
[45] U. Sivasankaran, J. Radecki, H. Radecka, K.G. Kumar, Copper nanoclusters: an 
efficient fluorescence sensing platform for quinoline yellow, Luminescence 34 (2) 
(2019) 243–248. 
[46] S. Abarghoei, N. Fakhri, Y.S. Borghei, M. Hosseini, M.R. Ganjali, A colorimetric 
paper sensor for citrate as biomarker for early stage detection of prostate cancer 
based on peroxidase-like activity of cysteine-capped gold nanoclusters, 
Spectrochim. Acta. A. Mol. Biomol, Spectrosc. 210 (2019) 251–259. 
[47] M. Jayasree, R.S. Aparna, R.R. Anjana, J.S. Anjali Devi, N. John, K. Abha, 
A. Manikandan, S. George, Fluorescence turn on detection of bilirubin using Fe 
(III) modulated BSA stabilized copper nanocluster; A mechanistic perception, 
Anal. Chim. Acta 1031 (2018) 152–160. 
[48] X. Le Guevel, V. Trouillet, C. Spies, G. Jung, M. Schneider, Synthesis of Yellow- 
Emitting Platinum Nanoclusters by Ligand Etching, J. Phys. Chem. C 116 (10) 
(2012) 6047–6051. 
[49] S. Choi, S. Park, J. Yu, Ligand-assisted etching: the stability of silver nanoparticles 
and the generation of luminescent silver nanodots, Chem. Commun. 50 (95) 
(2014) 15098–15100. 
[50] Q.Y. Wang, S.Y. Wang, X. Hu, F.Y. Li, D.S. Ling, Controlled synthesis and 
assembly of ultra-small nanoclusters for biomedical applications, Biomaterials 
Science 7 (2) (2019) 480–489. 
[51] H. Li, P.D. Han, X.B. Zhang, M. Li, Size-dependent melting point of nanoparticles 
based on bond number calculation, Mater. Chem. Phys. 137 (3) (2013) 
1007–1011. 
[52] P.V. Borisyuk, O.S. Vasil’ev, A.V. Krasavin, Y.Y. Lebedinskii, V.I. Troyan, The size 
dependence of thermal EMF for Au, Pd, and Pt nanoclusters deposited onto highly 
oriented pyrolitic graphite surface, Colloid J. 79 (1) (2017) 13–17. 
[53] A.A. Ansari, S.D. Sartale, Controlled growth of thermally stable uniform-sized Ag 
nanoparticles on flat support and their electrochemical activity, Applied Physics 
a-Materials Science & Processing 119 (2) (2015) 503–516. 
[54] K. Sonia, S. Kukreti, M. Kaushik, Gold nanoclusters: An ultrasmall platform for 
multifaceted applications, Talanta 234 (2021), 122623. 
[55] J. Jung, S. Kang, Y.-K. Han, Ligand effects on the stability of thiol-stabilized gold 
nanoclusters: Au-25(SR)(18)(-), Au-38(SR)(24), and Au-102(SR)(44), Nanoscale 
4 (14) (2012) 4206–4210. 
[56] Y. Tao, Y.H. Lin, Z.Z. Huang, J.S. Ren, X.G. Qu, Incorporating Graphene Oxide 
and Gold Nanoclusters: A Synergistic Catalyst with Surprisingly High Peroxidase- 
Like Activity Over a Broad pH Range and its Application for Cancer Cell 
Detection, Adv. Mater. 25 (18) (2013) 2594–2599. 
[57] W.W. He, W. Wamer, Q.S. Xia, J.J. Yin, P.P. Fu, Enzyme-Like Activity of 
Nanomaterials, Journal of Environmental Science and Health Part C- 
Environmental Carcinogenesis & Ecotoxicology Reviews 32 (2) (2014) 186–211. 
[58] W. Deng, Y. Peng, H. Yang, Y. Tan, M. Ma, Q. Xie, S. Chen, Ruthenium Ion- 
Complexed Carbon Nitride Nanosheets with Peroxidase-like Activity as a 
Ratiometric Fluorescence Probe for the Detection of Hydrogen Peroxide and 
Glucose, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11 (32) (2019) 29072–29077. 
[59] J. Goswami, L. Saikia, P. Hazarika, Carbon Dots-Decorated g-C3N4 as Peroxidase 
Nanozyme for Colorimetric Detection of Cr(VI) in Aqueous Medium, 
Chemistryselect 7 (31) (2022) e202201963. 
[60] M. Feng, Q. Zhang, X. Chen, D. Deng, X. Xie, X. Yang, Controllable synthesis of 
boron-doped Zn-N-C single-atom nanozymes for the ultrasensitive colorimetric 
detection of p-phenylenediamine, Biosens. Bioelectron. 210 (2022), 114294. 
[61] L. Hu, Y. Yuan, L. Zhang, J. Zhao, S. Majeed, G. Xu, Copper nanoclusters as 
peroxidase mimetics and their applications to H2O2 and glucose detection, Anal. 
Chim. Acta 762 (2013) 83–86. 
[62] Y. Fu, X. Zhao, J. Zhang, W. Li, DNA-Based Platinum Nanozymes for Peroxidase 
Mimetics, J. Phys. Chem. C 118 (31) (2014) 18116–18125. 
[63] Y.P. Zhong, C. Deng, Y. He, Y.L. Ge, G.W. Song, Exploring a monothiolated beta- 
cyclodextrin as the template to synthesize copper nanoclusters with exceptionally 
increased peroxidase-like activity, Microchim. Acta 183 (10) (2016) 2823–2830. 
[64] S. Cho, H.Y. Shin, M.I. Kim, Nanohybrids consisting of magnetic nanoparticles 
and gold nanoclusters as effective peroxidase mimics and their application for 
colorimetric detection of glucose, Biointerphases 12 (1) (2017) 01A401. 
[65] C.J. Yu, T.H. Chen, J.Y. Jiang, W.L. Tseng, Lysozyme-directed synthesis of 
platinum nanoclusters as a mimic oxidase, Nanoscale 6 (16) (2014) 9618–9624. 
[66] G.L. Wang, L.Y. Jin, X.M. Wu, Y.M. Dong, Z.J. Li, Label-free colorimetric sensor 
for mercury(II) and DNA on the basis of mercury(II) switched-on the oxidase- 
mimicking activity of silver nanoclusters, Anal. Chim. Acta 871 (2015) 1–8. 
[67] Y. Zhang, S. Li, H. Liu, W. Long, X.-D. Zhang, Enzyme-Like Properties of Gold 
Clusters for Biomedical Application, Frontiers in Chemistry 8 (2020) 219. 
[68] C.P. Liu, T.H. Wu, C.Y. Liu, K.C. Chen, Y.X. Chen, G.S. Chen, S.Y. Lin, Self- 
Supplying O-2 through the Catalase-Like Activity of Gold Nanoclusters for 
Photodynamic Therapy against Hypoxic Cancer Cells, Small 13 (26) (2017) 
1700278. 
[69] R. Liu, L. Zuo, X.R. Huang, S.M. Liu, G.Y. Yang, S.Y. Li, C.Y. Lv, Colorimetric 
determination of lead(II) or mercury(II) based on target induced switching of the 
enzyme-like activity of metallothionein-stabilized copper nanoclusters, 
Microchim. Acta 186 (4) (2019) 250. 
[70] M. Balamurugan, P. Santharaman, T. Madasamy, S. Rajesh, N.K. Sethy, 
K. Bhargava, S. Kotamraju, C. Karunakaran, Recent trends in electrochemical 
biosensors of superoxide dismutases, Biosens. Bioelectron. 116 (2018) 89–99. 
[71] Y. Huang, Z. Liu, C. Liu, E. Ju, Y. Zhang, J. Ren, X. Qu, Self-Assembly of Multi- 
nanozymes to Mimic an Intracellular Antioxidant Defense System, Angewandte 
Chemie-International Edition 55 (23) (2016) 6646–6650. 
[72] M.M. Sozarukova, M.A. Shestakova, M.A. Teplonogova, D.Y. Izmailov, E. 
V. Proskurnina, V.K. Ivanov, Quantification of Free Radical Scavenging Properties 
and SOD-Like Activity of Cerium Dioxide Nanoparticles in Biochemical Models, 
Russ. J. Inorg. Chem. 65 (4) (2020) 597–605. 
[73] L.X. Niu, Y.Y. Cai, T. Dong, Y.J. Zhang, X.X. Liu, X. Zhang, L.X. Zeng, A.H. Liu, 
Vanadium nitride@carbon nanofiber composite: Synthesis, cascade enzyme 
mimics and its sensitive and selective colorimetric sensing of superoxide anion, 
Biosens. Bioelectron. 210 (2022), 114285. 
[74] W.Y. Mi, S. Tang, S.S. Guo, H.J. Li, N. Shao, In situ synthesis of red fluorescent 
gold nanoclusters with enzyme-like activity for oxidative stress amplification in 
chemodynamic therapy, Chin. Chem. Lett. 33 (3) (2022) 1331–1336. 
[75] W. Feng, X. Han, H. Hu, M. Chang, L. Ding, H. Xiang, Y. Chen, Y. Li, 2D vanadium 
carbide MXenzyme to alleviate ROS-mediated inflammatory and 
neurodegenerative diseases, Nat. Commun. 12 (1) (2021) 2203. 
[76] S. Liu, S. Pang, A dual-model strategy for fluorometric determination of ascorbic 
acid and of ascorbic acid oxidase activity by using DNA-templated gold-silver 
nanoclusters, Mikrochim. Acta 185 (9) (2018) 426. 
N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Chemical Engineering Journal 465 (2023) 142817
14
[77] H. Pezhhan, M. Akhond, M. Shamsipur, Histidine capped-gold nanoclusters 
mediated fluorescence detection of glucose and hydrogen peroxide based on 
glucose oxidase-mimicking property of gold nanoparticles via an inner filter effect 
mechanism, J. Lumin. 228 (2020), 117604. 
[78] Y.Q. Huang, S. Fu, Y.S. Wang, J.H. Xue, X.L. Xiao, S.H. Chen, B. Zhou, Protamine- 
gold nanoclusters as peroxidase mimics and the selective enhancement of their 
activity by mercury ions for highly sensitive colorimetric assay of Hg(II), Anal. 
Bioanal. Chem. 410 (28) (2018) 7385–7394. 
[79] Y.Y. Song, J. Qiao, W. Liu, L. Qi, Norfloxacin detection based on the peroxidase- 
like activity enhancement of gold nanoclusters, Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 413 (4) 
(2021) 979–985. 
[80] Y.Y. Song, J. Qiao, W. Liu, L. Qi, Enhancement of gold nanoclusters-based 
peroxidase nanozymes for detection of tetracycline, Microchem. J. 157 (2020), 
104871. 
[81] S.Y. Ma, J.J. Wang, G. Yang, J.X. Yang, D.R. Ding, M. Zhang, Copper(II) ions 
enhance the peroxidase-like activity and stability of keratin-capped gold 
nanoclusters for the colorimetric detection of glucose, Microchim. Acta 186 (5) 
(2019) 271. 
[82] Y.Y. Song, J. Qiao, W. Liu, L. Qi, Colorimetric detection of serum doxycycline 
with d-histidine-functionalized gold nanoclusters as nanozymes, Analyst 145 (10) 
(2020) 3564–3568. 
[83] C.F. Jiang, C. Zhang, J. Song, X.J. Ji, W. Wang, Cytidine-gold nanoclusters as 
peroxidase mimetic for colorimetric detection of glutathione (GSH), glutathione 
disulfide (GSSG) and glutathione reductase (GR), Spectrochimica Acta Part a- 
Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy 250 (2021), 119316. 
[84] Q. Ma, J. Qiao, Y.F. Liu, L. Qi, Colorimetric monitoring of serum dopamine with 
promotion activity of gold nanocluster-based nanozymes, Analyst 146 (21) 
(2021) 6615–6620. 
[85] P.Y. Yu, Y.S. Chen, H.H. Yu, F.I. Chen, Z.W. Chen, C.P. Liu, The photo-activated 
oxidase-like activity of gold nanoclusters: Implication for singlet oxygen 
generation, Journal of Photochemistry and Photobiology a-Chemistry 432 
(2022), 114063. 
[86] J.J. Li, D. Qiao, S.Z. Yang, G.J. Weng, J. Zhu, J.W. Zhao, Colorimetric 
determination of cysteine based on inhibition of GSH-Au/Pt NCs as peroxidase 
mimic, Spectrochimica Acta Part a-Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy 248 
(2021), 119257. 
[87] Y.C. Gao, C. Wang, C.X. Zhang, H.W. Li, Y.Q. Wu, Controlled preparation and 
application of glutathione capped gold and platinum alloy nanoclusters with high 
peroxidase-like activity, Journal of Materials Science & Technology 109 (2022) 
140–146. 
[88] Z. Dehghani, M. Hosseini, J. Mohammadnejad, M.R. Ganjali, New Colorimetric 
DNA Sensor for Detection of Campylobacter jejuni in Milk Sample Based on 
Peroxidase-Like Activity of Gold/Platinium Nanocluster, Chemistryselect 4 (40) 
(2019) 11687–11692. 
[89] S.S. Zheng, H.Z. Gu, D.Y. Yin, J.L. Zhang, W. Li, Y. Fu, Biogenic synthesis of AuPd 
nanocluster as a peroxidase mimic and its application for colorimetric assay of 
acid phosphatase, Colloids and Surfaces a-Physicochemical and Engineering 
Aspects 589 (2020), 124444. 
[90] H.L. Sun, J.B. Zhang, M.J. Wang, X.G. Su, Ratiometric fluorometric and 
colorimetric dual-mode sensing of glucose based on gold-platinum bimetallic 
nanoclusters, Microchem. J. 179 (2022), 107574. 
[91] C.X. Zhang, Y.C. Gao, H.W. Li, Y.Q. Wu, Gold-Platinum Bimetallic Nanoclusters 
for Oxidase-like Catalysis, Acs Applied Nano Materials 3 (9) (2020) 9318–9328. 
[92] Q. Xue, X. Li, Y. Peng, P. Liu, H. Peng, X. Niu, Polyethylenimine-stabilized silver 
nanoclusters act as an oxidoreductase mimic for colorimetric determination of 
chromium(VI), Microchim. Acta 187 (5) (2020) 263. 
[93] A. Khataee, M.H. Irani-Nezhad, J. Hassanzadeh, Improved peroxidase mimetic 
activity of a mixture of WS2 nanosheets and silver nanoclusters for 
chemiluminescent quantification of H2O2 and glucose, Microchim. Acta 185 (3) 
(2018) 190. 
[94] Y. Cai, J. Wang, L. Niu, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, C. Liu, S. Yang, H. Qi, A. Liu, Selective 
colorimetric sensing of sub-nanomolar Hg2+ based on its significantly enhancing 
peroxidase mimics of silver/copper nanoclusters, Analyst 146 (14) (2021) 
4630–4635. 
[95] L.L. Wu, L.Y. Wang, Z.J. Xie, N. Pan, C.F. Peng, Colorimetric assay of L-cysteine 
based on peroxidase-mimicking DNA-Ag/Pt nanoclusters, Sensors and Actuators 
B-Chemical 235 (2016) 110–116. 
[96] S. Maity, D. Bain, S. Chakraborty, S. Kolay, A. Patra, Copper Nanocluster (Cu-23 
NC)-Based Biomimetic System with Peroxidase Activity, Acs Sustainable 
Chemistry & Engineering 8 (49) (2020) 18335–18344. 
[97] C.Y. Liu, Y.Y. Cai, J. Wang, X. Liu, H. Ren, L. Yan, Y.J. Zhang, S.Q. Yang, J. Guo, 
A.H. Liu, Facile Preparation of Homogeneous Copper Nanoclusters Exhibiting 
Excellent Tetraenzyme Mimetic Activities for Colorimetric Glutathione Sensing 
and Fluorimetric Ascorbic Acid Sensing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12 (38) 
(2020) 42521–42530. 
[98] S.H. Chen, Z. Li, Z.Z. Huang, Q. Jia, Investigation of efficient synergistic and 
protective effects of chitosan on copper nanoclusters: Construction of highly 
active and stable nanozyme for colorimetric and fluorometric dual-signal 
biosensing, Sensors and Actuators B-Chemical 332 (2021), 129522. 
[99] N. Singh, K.P. Raul, A. Poulose, G. Mugesh, V. Venkatesh, Highly Stable 
Pyrimidine Based Luminescent Copper Nanoclusters with Superoxide Dismutase 
Mimetic and Nitric Oxide Releasing Activity, ACS applied bio materials 3 (11) 
(2020) 7454–7461. 
[100] X. Lai, Y. Han, J. Zhang, J.Y. Zhang, W.F. Lin, Z.W. Liu, L.G. Wang, Peroxidase- 
Like Platinum Clusters Synthesized by Ganoderma lucidum Polysaccharide for 
Sensitively Colorimetric Detection of Dopamine, Molecules 26 (9) (2021) 2738. 
[101] L. Dong, R.Y. Li, L.Q. Wang, X.F. Lan, H.T. Sun, Y. Zhao, L.G. Wang, Green 
synthesis of platinum nanoclusters using lentinan for sensitively colorimetric 
detection of glucose, Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 172 (2021) 289–298. 
[102] X.L. Liu, M.M. Tian, C.Y. Li, F.S. Tian, Polyvinylpyrrolidone-stabilized Pt 
nanoclusters as robust oxidase mimics for selective detection of ascorbic acid, 
Colloids and Surfaces a-Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects 625 (2021). 
[103] K. Liu, Y. Zhao, L. Zhang, M.M. He, W.F. Lin, H.T. Sun, Z.W. Liu, J. Hu, L.G. Wang, 
Biocompatible Platinum Nanoclusters Prepared Using Bitter Gourd 
Polysaccharide for Colorimetric Detection of Ascorbic Acid, Biomolecules 11 (5) 
(2021) 647. 
[104] L.H. Jin, Z. Meng, Y.Q. Zhang, S.J. Cai, Z.J. Zhang, C. Li, L. Shang, Y.H. Shen, 
Ultrasmall Pt Nanoclusters as Robust Peroxidase Mimics for Colorimetric 
Detection of Glucose in Human Serum, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 9 (11) (2017) 
10027–10033. 
[105] N. Xu, M. Zhang, W. Xu, G. Ling, J. Yu, P. Zhang, Swellable PVA/PVP hydrogel 
microneedle patches for the extraction of interstitial skin fluid toward minimally 
invasive monitoring of blood glucose level, Analyst 147 (7) (2022) 1478–1491. 
[106] A.L. Galant, R.C. Kaufman, J.D. Wilson, Glucose: Detection and analysis, Food 
Chem. 188 (2015) 149–160. 
[107] P. Wu, Q.A. Shao, Y.J. Hu, J.A. Jin, Y.J. Yin, H. Zhang, C.X. Cai, Direct 
electrochemistry of glucose oxidase assembled on graphene and application to 
glucose detection, Electrochim. Acta 55 (28) (2010) 8606–8614. 
[108] F. Qu, X.Y. Guo, D.Y. Liu, G. Chen, J.M. You, Dual-emission carbon nanodots as a 
ratiometric nanosensor for the detection of glucose and glucose oxidase, Sensors 
and Actuators B-Chemical 233 (2016) 320–327. 
[109] S.S. Jiang, Y.F. Zhang, Y.C. Yang, Y. Huang, G.C. Ma, Y.X. Luo, P. Huang, J. Lin, 
Glucose Oxidase-Instructed Fluorescence Amplification Strategy for Intracellular 
Glucose Detection, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11 (11) (2019) 10554–10558. 
[110] Y.J. Pang, Z.L. Huang, Y.F. Yang, Y.J. Long, H.Z. Zheng, Colorimetric detection of 
glucose based on ficin with peroxidase-like activity, Spectrochimica Acta Part a- 
Molecular and Biomolecular, Spectroscopy 189 (2018) 510–515. 
[111] J.X. Chen, W.W. Wu, L. Huang, Q. Ma, S.J. Dong, Self-Indicative Gold Nanozyme 
for H2O2 and Glucose Sensing, Chemistry-a European Journal 25 (51) (2019) 
11940–11944. 
[112] L. Zhong, H. Xu, Z. Yu, K. Yun, Bowl-shaped graphene oxide/Fe3O4 composites 
on Au-PCB electrode for electrochemical detection of dopamine, Ionics 26 (8) 
(2020) 4171–4181. 
[113] Y. Lan, F. Yuan, T.H. Fereja, C. Wang, B. Lou, J. Li, G. Xu, Chemiluminescence of 
Lucigenin/Riboflavin and Its Application for Selective and Sensitive Dopamine 
Detection, Anal. Chem. 91 (3) (2019) 2135–2139. 
[114] Y. Tao, Y.H. Lin, J.S. Ren, X.G. Qu, A dual fluorometric and colorimetric sensor 
for dopamine based on BSA-stabilized Au nanoclusters, Biosens. Bioelectron. 42 
(2013) 41–46. 
[115] Y.J. Liu, M.M. Li, K.M.C. Wong, Y. Tong, H. Yang, J. Kong, A New Quinone Based 
Fluorescent Probe for High Sensitive and Selective Detection of Biothiols and Its 
Application in Living Cell Imaging, International Journal of Analytical Chemistry 
2019 (2019) 7536431. 
[116] Q. Zhang, S.S. Ding, Q.S. Zhai, G.Q. Feng, Highly sensitive and selective detection 
of biothiols by a new low dose colorimetric and fluorescent probe, Rsc Advances 5 
(77) (2015) 62325–62330. 
[117] H.H. Deng, X.L. Lin, Y.H. Liu, K.L. Li, Q.Q. Zhuang, H.P. Peng, A.L. Liu, X.H. Xia, 
W. Chen, Chitosan-stabilized platinum nanoparticles as effective oxidase mimics 
for colorimetric detection of acid phosphatase, Nanoscale 9 (29) (2017) 
10292–10300. 
[118] P. Ni, C. Chen, Y. Jiang, C. Zhang, B. Wang, B. Cao, C. Li, Y. Lu, Gold nanoclusters- 
based dual-channel assay for colorimetric and turn-on fluorescent sensing of 
alkaline phosphatase, Sensors and Actuators B-Chemical 301 (2019), 127080. 
[119] H.F. Dong, S. Jin, H.X. Ju, K.H. Hao, L.P. Xu, H.T. Lu, X.J. Zhang, Trace and Label- 
Free MicroRNA Detection Using Oligonucleotide Encapsulated Silver 
Nanoclusters as Probes, Anal. Chem. 84 (20) (2012) 8670–8674. 
[120] Q. Zhao, H.W. Huang, L.Y. Zhang, L.Q. Wang, Y.L. Zeng, X.D. Xia, F.P. Liu, 
Y. Chen, Strategy To Fabricate Naked-Eye Readout Ultrasensitive Plasmonic 
Nanosensor Based on Enzyme Mimetic Gold Nanoclusters, Anal. Chem. 88 (2) 
(2016) 1412–1418. 
[121] V. Mora-Sanz, L. Saa, N. Briz, M. Moller, V. Pavlov, Antibody-Directed Synthesis 
of Catalytic Nanoclusters for Bioanalytical Assays, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12 
(26) (2020) 28993–28999. 
[122] M. Salvador, J.L. Marques-Fernandez, A. Bunge, J.C. Martinez-Garcia, R. Turcu, 
D. Peddis, M.D. Garcia-Suarez, M.D. Cima-Cabal, M. Rivas, Magnetic Nanoclusters 
Increase the Sensitivity of Lateral Flow Immunoassays for Protein Detection: 
Application to Pneumolysin as a Biomarker for Streptococcus pneumoniae, 
Nanomaterials 12 (12) (2022) 2044. 
[123] Z.W. Du, C.Y. Wei, Using G-Rich Sequence to Enhance the Peroxidase-Mimicking 
Activity of DNA-Cu/Ag Nanoclusters for Rapid Colorimetric Detection of 
Hydrogen Peroxide and Glucose, Chemistryselect 5 (17) (2020) 5166–5171. 
[124] J.Y. Feng, P.C. Huang, F.Y. Wu, Gold-platinum bimetallic nanoclusters with 
enhanced peroxidase-like activity and their integrated agarose hydrogel-based 
sensing platform for the colorimetric analysis of glucose levels in serum, Analyst 
142 (21) (2017) 4106–4115. 
[125] X.H. Yang, J. Ling, J. Peng, Q.E. Cao, L. Wang, Z.T. Ding, J. Xiong, Catalytic 
formation of silver nanoparticles by bovine serum albumin protected-silver 
nanoclusters and its application for colorimetric detection of ascorbic acid, 
Spectrochimica Acta Part a-Molecular and Biomolecular, Spectroscopy 106 
(2013) 224–230. 
[126] J.Y. Feng, P.C. Huang, S.Z. Shi, K.Y. Deng, F.Y. Wu, Colorimetric detection of 
glutathione in cells based on peroxidase-like activity of gold nanoclusters: A 
N. Gao et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     

Chemical Engineering Journal 465 (2023) 142817
15
promising powerful tool for identifying cancer cells, Anal. Chim. Acta 967 (2017) 
64–69. 
[127] Y.S. Borghei, M. Hosseini, M.R. Ganjali, Visual detection of miRNA using 
peroxidase-like catalytic activity of DNA-CuNCs and methylene blue as indicator, 
Clin. Chim. Acta 483 (2018) 119–125. 
[128] N. Fakhri, S. Abarghoei, M. Dadmehr, M. Hosseini, H. Sabahi, M.R. Ganjali, Paper 
based colorimetric detection of miRNA-21 using Ag/Pt nanoclusters, 
Spectrochimica Acta Part a-Molecular and Biomolecular Spectroscopy 227 
(2020), 117529. 
[129] A. Elgamouz, A. Kawde, S.S. Alharthi, M. Laghoub, D. Miqlid, C. Nassab, K. Bajou, 
S.P. Patole, Cinnamon extract’s phytochemicals stabilized Ag nanoclusters as 
nanozymes “peroxidase and xanthine oxidase mimetic” for simultaneous 
colorimetric sensing of H2O2 and xanthine, Colloids and Surfaces a- 
Physicochemical and Engineering Aspects 647 (2022), 129035. 
[130] Z.Y. Yan, Q.Q. Niu, M.Y. Mou, Y. Wu, X.X. Liu, S.H. Liao, A novel colorimetric 
method based on copper nanoclusters with intrinsic peroxidase-like for detecting 
xanthine in serum samples, Journal of Nanoparticle Research 19 (7) (2017) 235. 
[131] Y.J. Shi, J.J. Wang, K. Mu, S.Q. Liu, G. Yang, M. Zhang, J.X. Yang, Copper (II) Ion- 
Modified Gold Nanoclusters as Peroxidase Mimetics for the Colorimetric 
Detection of Pyrophosphate, Sensors 21 (16) (2021) 5538. 
[132] L.Z. Hu, H. Liao, L.Y. Feng, M. Wang, W.S. Fu, Accelerating the Peroxidase-Like 
Activity of Gold Nanoclusters at Neutral pH for Colorimetric Detection of Heparin 
and Heparinase Activity, Anal. Chem. 90 (10) (2018) 6247–6252. 
[133] G.L. Wang, L.Y. Jin, Y.M. Dong, X.M. Wu, Z.J. Li, Intrinsic enzyme mimicking 
activity of gold nanoclusters upon visible light triggering and its application for 
colorimetric trypsin detection, Biosens. Bioelectron. 64 (2015) 523–529. 
[134] Z. Dehghani, J. Mohammadnejad, M. Hosseini, A new colorimetric assay for 
amylase based on starch-supported Cu/Au nanocluster peroxidase-like activity, 
Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 411 (16) (2019) 3621–3629. 
[135] J.-Y. Yue, L.-P. Song, Y.-T. Wang, P. Yang, Y. Ma, B. Tang, Fluorescence/ 
Colorimetry/Smartphone Triple-Mode Sensing of Dopamine by a COF-Based 
Peroxidase-Mimic Platform, Anal. Chem. 94 (41) (2022) 14419–14425. 
[136] F.W. Huang, K. Ma, X.W. Ni, S.L. Qiao, K.Z. Chen, CuCoFe Layered double 
hydroxides as laccase mimicking nanozymes for colorimetric detection of 
pheochromocytoma biomarkers, Chem. Commun. 58 (12) (2022) 1982–1985. 
[137] A.W. Martinez, S.T. Phillips, M.J. Butte, G.M. Whitesides, Patterned paper as a 
platform for inexpensive, low-volume, portable bioassays, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 
Engl. 46 (8) (2007) 1318–1320. 
[138] P. Zhang, X. Wu, H. Xue, Y. Wang, X. Luo, L. Wang, Wearable transdermal 
colorimetric microneedle patch for Uric acid monitoring based on peroxidase-like 
polypyrrole nanoparticles, Anal. Chim. Acta 1212 (2022), 339911. 
N. Gao et al.