Phytomedicine 132 (2024) 155822
Available online 12 June 2024
0944-7113/© 2024 Elsevier GmbH. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
Potential therapeutic natural compounds for the treatment of 
Alzheimer’s disease 
Qihui Huang a,b, Weihao Wu d, Yuxi Wen a,b, Suyue Lu d, Chao Zhao a,c,* 
a State Key Laboratory of Mariculture Breeding, Key Laboratory of Marine Biotechnology of Fujian Province, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, 
China 
b Universidade de Vigo, Nutrition and Bromatology Group, Department of Analytical Chemistry and Food Science, Instituto de Agroecoloxía e Alimentaci´on (IAA)- 
CITEXVI, 36310 Vigo, Spain 
c College of Marine Sciences, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, China 
d College of Food Science, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, Fuzhou 350002, China   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Alzheimer’s disease 
Pathogenic mechanisms 
Natural compounds 
A B S T R A C T   
Background: Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a complicated neurodegenerative disease with cognitive impairment 
occurring in the older people, in which extracellular accumulation of β-amyloid and intracellular aggregation of 
hyperphosphorylated tau are regarded as the prevailing theories. However, the exact AD mechanism has not 
been determined. Moreover, there is no effective treatment available in phase III trials to eradicate AD, which is 
imperative to explore novel treatments. 
Purpose: A number of up-to-date pre-clinical studies on cognitive impairment is beneficial to clarify the pathology 
of AD. This review recapitulates several advances in AD pathobiology and discusses the neuroprotective effects of 
natural compounds, such as phenolic compounds, natural polysaccharides and oligosaccharides, peptide, and 
lipids, underscoring the therapeutic potential for AD. 
Methods: Electronic databases involving PubMed, Web of Science, and Google Scholar were searched up to 
October 2023. Articles were conducted using the keywords like Alzheimer’s disease, pathogenic mechanisms, 
natural compounds, and neuroprotection. 
Result: This review summarized several AD pathologies and the neuroprotective effects of natural compounds 
such as natural polysaccharides and oligosaccharides, peptide, and lipids. 
Conclusion: We have discussed the pathogenic mechanisms of AD and the effect natural products on neurode­
generative diseases particularly in treating AD. Specifically, we investigated the molecular pathways and links 
between natural compounds and Alzheimer’s disease such as through NF-κB, Nrf2, and mTOR pathway. Further 
investigation is necessary in exploring the bioactivity and effectiveness of natural compounds in clinical trials, 
which may provide a promising treatment for AD patients.   
Introduction 
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is an intricate and age-related progressive 
central neurodegenerative disease that leads to cognitive dysfunction 
due to neuronal abnormalities (Voulgaropoulou et al., 2019; J. Wang 
et al., 2021). There are still many controversies in the research on the 
pathogenesis of AD because of the complex etiology of AD involving 
many pathogenic mechanisms (Karran et al., 2011). Neurofibrillary 
tangles and senile plaques in brain appears prior to manifestation of any 
symptoms of cognitive deficits in AD patients by about ten to twenty 
Abbreviation: ABCA1, ATP-binding cassette A1; AcCoA, acetyl coenzyme A; ACh, acetylcholine; AChE, acetyl cholinesterase; AD, Alzheimer’s disease; AMP, 
Astragalus membranaceus polysaccharide; APOE, apolipoprotein E; APP, amyloid precursor protein; Aβ, β-amyloid; BBB, blood-brain barrier; CAA, cerebral amyloid 
angiopathy; ChAT, choline acetyltransferase; EGCG, epigallocatechin-3-gallate; FVP, Flammulina velutipes polysaccharides; LBP, Lycium barbarum polysaccharides; 
LDLR, low-density lipoprotein receptor; LPS, lipopolysaccharide; LRP1, low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1; M, muscarinic receptor; MOS, mannan 
oligosaccharide; N, nicotinic receptor; NBM, nucleus basalis of meynert; POP, Pleurotus ostreatus L. polysaccharide; SAMP8, senescence-accelerated mouse prone 8; 
SCA, Santacruzamate A; TREM2, triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2; VLDLR, very-low-density lipoprotein receptor. 
* Corresponding author at: No.15 Shangxiadian Road, Fuzhou 350002, China. 
E-mail address: zhchao@live.cn (C. Zhao).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Phytomedicine 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/phymed 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.phymed.2024.155822 
Received 17 February 2024; Received in revised form 9 June 2024; Accepted 11 June 2024   

Phytomedicine 132 (2024) 155822
2
years (Long and Holtzman, 2019). The salient features of mild AD pa­
tients are memory decline and weak judgment, whereas AD patients in 
the later stages are chiefly characterized by serious cognitive impair­
ment such as the inability to react to the environment and difficulty in 
controlling movement ending with death that is described as an inevi­
table outcome (Shal et al., 2018). 
According to the Aβ hypothesis, current therapeutic approaches for 
AD primarily include β-secretase (BACE1) inhibitors, aimed at sup­
pressing Aβ production, anti-aggregation drugs, designed to hinder Aβ 
aggregation, and protease activity-regulating drugs, employed for Aβ 
clearance (P. P. Liu et al., 2019). For example, the primary goal of 
BACE1 inhibitors designed to lower Aβ levels, and they have undergone 
years of testing. Despite this, none of the BACE1 inhibitors have suc­
cessfully completed clinical trials. Verubecestat (Merck company) ach­
ieved a reduction of up to 90% in Aβ levels in the cerebrospinal fluid of 
AD patients. Nevertheless, Merck company decided to discontinue ver­
ubecestat from its research due to its failure to ameliorate cognitive 
decline and its association with adverse effects (Egan et al., 2018). These 
effects involve rash, sleep disturbance, suicidal ideation, and hair-color 
change, which were more prevalently observed in the verubecestat 
group compared to control group. Other drugs for treating AD like 
lanabecestat, atabecestat and solanezumab also face similar challenges, 
all of which ended with unfavorable effects (Panza et al., 2019). In 
addition, the research on immunotherapy showed that in phase 2a 
study, satisfactory clinical results with regard to the evaluation of the 
safety, tolerability, and immunogenicity of UB-311 (an active anti-Aβ 
vaccine) have been obtained, supporting the continual progress of 
UB-311 development (Yu et al., 2023). Recent research employing brain 
imaging techniques has suggested that older adults with Aβ plaques can 
exhibit normal cognitive function, emphasizing the greater importance 
of soluble Aβ42 depletion as a decisive factor, which may offer an 
alternative therapeutic approach, namely the restoration of soluble 
Aβ42 (Sturchio et al., 2022). 
Based on the tau propagation hypothesis, drugs aimed at the tau 
protein comprise tau kinase inhibitors, microtubule stabilizers, and in­
hibitors of heat shock protein 90 (Hsp90) that stabilize GSK3β. Drugs 
targeting hyperphosphorylated tau proteins such as TRx0237, ACI-35, 
and AADvac1 are currently undergoing clinical trials. Besides, recent 
studies demonstrated that AADvac1 can decelerate AD-related decline 
through a dose dependence mechanism. But the larger scale anti-tau 
investigations of AADvac1 in AD patients would be needed because 
this current analysis does not serve as conclusive evidence of efficacy 
(Cullen et al., 2024). Nevertheless, tau-directed therapies unavoidably 
confront challenges akin to those seen in current Aβ-directed trials, 
which awaits future testing (Gody´n et al., 2016; Huang et al., 2020). 
Unfortunately, none of treatments in AD are currently viable. As a result, 
there is an urgent need for treatment strategies in AD patients to prevent 
or ameliorate the progression of AD. Recently, natural compounds have 
attracted greater attention because they are considered as less toxic and 
more efficacious than new synthetic medicines (da Rosa et al., 2022). 
This review focused on some advances of the pathogenesis of AD and 
summarized some natural compounds that are involved in attenuating 
AD pathology. 
Pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease 
AD is the most common neurodegenerative disease that affects old 
individuals over 65 years. And special pathological features such as 
senile plaques and tangles of nerve fibers were detected in the brain of 
AD patients, which were later found in vivo in the continued study of AD 
(Frisoni et al., 2022; Kumar and Dogra, 2008). AD accounts for 60–80% 
of dementia, whose pathogenesis has not been fully defined yet, and its 
pathological manifestations are mainly characterized by senile plaques 
formed by β-amyloid (Aβ) deposition, neurofibrillary tangles formed by 
hyperphosphorylation of tau protein, and a large number of neuronal 
death (Calabr`o et al., 2021; Rad et al., 2018). The idea of the Aβ 
hypothesis originated from John Hardy and David Allsop in 1991 (Y. Liu 
et al., 2019). As shown in Fig. 1, Aβ is synthesized by amyloid precursor 
protein (APP), and is released into the interstitial fluid. Subsequently, Aβ 
can accumulate into higher order oligomers and fibrils that disrupt 
synaptic activity and cerebral capillary blood flow and facilitate tau 
aggregation. Besides, the tau propagation hypothesis was first proposed 
in the year 2009 (P. P. Liu et al., 2019). Misfolded tau facilitates tem­
plated misfolding of native monomers, which can result in the seeding of 
new pathologic tau aggregation that influences the integrity of synaptic 
transmission. The disease is characterized by insidiously onset and 
gradual irreversible progression. Studies have showed that most clinical 
trials based on Aβ-targeted therapy has ended in disappointing results, 
and evidences hint that there are probably other factors that play a 
critical role in AD (Long and Holtzman, 2019; Nelson et al., 2012). With 
the in-depth of research, many hypotheses about AD have emerged, such 
as vascular hypothesis, acetylcholine theory, Apolipoprotein E (APOE), 
and neuroinflammation, etc. (Axelsen et al., 2011; Kalaria et al., 2012; 
Misrani et al., 2021; Verma et al., 2018; Zou et al., 2021). 
Vascular lesion 
In recent years, the vascular hypothesis of controversial vascular 
factors affecting the occurrence of AD has attracted more and more 
attention, and some brain imaging studies have suggested that in AD 
patients, vascular dysfunction may appear before cognitive function 
decline and neural degenerative diseases (Solis et al., 2020). Low cere­
bral perfusion and impaired Aβ removal across blood brain barrier may 
result in Aβ accumulating in blood vessels and parenchymal deposit, 
which could lead to the progress of AD dementia (Bell and Zlokovic, 
2009; Deane and Zlokovic, 2007). The vascular hypothesis of Aβ accu­
mulation indicated that Aβ accumulation in the brain is not the primary 
factor of AD. This hypothesis showed that vascular injury initiates Aβ 
accumulation by causing the destruction of the blood brain barrier, 
increasing exogenous Aβ transport into the brain, and reducing the 
clearance of Aβ in the brain, which further caused AD intracerebral 
accumulation of Aβ (Aliev et al., 2014). On the other hand, by causing 
decreased blood flow in brain microvessels, ischemia and hypoxia in 
nerve tissues, the production of Aβ increased. Both pathways eventually 
lead to the accumulation of Aβ, resulting in loss of neuronal function and 
neurodegenerative changes (Pansari et al., 2002; Sweeney et al., 2019). 
Acetylcholine in AD 
As a major neurotransmitter in the brain, acetylcholine (ACh) is 
found in the cortex, basal ganglia, and basal forebrain, in which the 
nucleus basalis of meynert (NBM) is a main resource (Hampel et al., 
2018). It was reported that ACh was closely correlated with significant 
neuronal loss from the NBM in AD patients, and the more severe the loss 
of ACh is, the more severe the degree of dementia (Bartus et al., 1982; 
Strekalova et al., 2006). Studies on early-stage of AD have shown that 
the cholinergic lesion is chiefly presynaptic instead of postsynaptic. In 
cholinergic presynaptic neurons, ACh is produced by choline and 
acetyl-coenzyme A in the presence of choline acetyltransferase (ChAT), 
and is shipped to synaptic vesicles, which is decomposed into choline 
and acetate by acetyl cholinesterase (AChE) (Fig. 2). Subsequently, ACh 
is released into the synaptic cleft under the depolarization of neurons. 
Then, ACh attaches to ACh receptors, named nicotinic (ionotropic) re­
ceptors and muscarinic (metabotropic) receptors, to achieve neuro­
transmission (Ju and Tam, 2022). 
Research has shown that the levels of ACh in the brain cortical ce­
rebrospinal fluid were prominently reduced in the advancement of AD, 
which was related to cognitive dysfunction. Acetylcholinesterase 
(AChE) is a hydrolytic enzyme of ACh (Aluko, 2021), which can control 
the information transmission between the synapses of cholinergic neu­
rons (Long and Holtzman, 2019). AChE was regarded as a highly feasible 
target for ameliorating symptom of AD. With the intervention of AChE 
Q. Huang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

Phytomedicine 132 (2024) 155822
3
inhibitor that binds to AChE, ACh can interact with M1 receptor to 
transmit signals from presynaptic neuron to postsynaptic neuron. So 
using AChE inhibitors like natural products to reduce the consumption 
of ACh can improve the excitability of cholinergic neurons, which is a 
viable therapeutic method for AD patients (Kabir et al., 2019) (Fig. 2). It 
has been found that the expression of AChE increases when there is Aβ 
deposition. Such neurochemical events aim to counteract the depletion 
of basal cholinergic neurons (Oboh et al., 2022). To sum up, AChE in­
hibitors like include donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine can 
mitigate cognitive dysfunction in AD patients by impeding the break­
down of ACh. While the existing pharmaceuticals employed in AD 
therapy can ameliorate the well-being of patients, they do not substan­
tially influence the onset or progression of AD (Liu et al., 2018). 
Apolipoprotein E (APOE) 
In the brain, APOE encoding apolipoprotein E is largely secreted by 
astrocytes, which is considered as the strongest genetic risk factor for 
late onset Alzheimer’s disease (LOAD). And it is lipidated by ABCA1 that 
can transport cholesterol and phospholipids to form high-density lipo­
protein particles. Lipidated APOE can bind to Aβ monomers and oligo­
mers, and bind to cell surface receptors such as LRP1, LDLR, and VLDLR 
Fig. 1. Role of Aβ and Tau in AD. (a) Aβ metabolic pathways; (b) Pathological tau aggregation; (c) Healthy brain and AD brain. Aβ is synthesized and released into 
the interstitial fluid. Aβ can subsequently accumulate into higher order oligomers and fibrils to disrupt synaptic activity. Misfolded tau facilitates templated mis­
folding of native monomers, causing the diffusion of new pathologic tau aggregation to impair the integrity of synaptic transmission. 
Fig. 2. Role of ACh in AD. ACh is synthesized and transported to synaptic cleft. AChE inhibitor can bind to AChE, and ACh can interact with M1 receptor to transmit 
signals from presynaptic neuron to postsynaptic neuron. 
Q. Huang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

Phytomedicine 132 (2024) 155822
4
in microglia and neurons. Moreover, it can interact with TREM2 in 
microglia. APOE modulates Aβ aggregation and deposition and blocks 
Aβ clearance at the BBB in an isoform-specific pattern. Aβ deposition in 
peripheral vasculature would result in CAA and interfere with the 
function of blood vessel (Fig. 3). Studies based on incidence data showed 
that APOE4 is not only a dangerous factor for late onset of AD, but also 
for early onset of AD (Genin et al., 2011). In the central nervous system, 
APOE used as the main cholesterol carrier influences multiple cellular 
processes such as neuronal growth, synaptogenesis, and neuro­
inflammation (Lanfranco et al., 2020). APOE gene exists three major 
alleles, namely, APOE2, APOE3 and APOE4. Distinct amino acid resi­
dues influence APOE isoform structure and determine the capacity of 
binding lipids and receptors (Liu et al., 2013). In these alleles, APOE4 is 
related with the pathogenesis of AD, while APOE2 may afford some 
protection against AD (Yamazaki et al., 2019). Experiments in APOE 
knockout mice indicated that APOE plays a crucial role in synaptic 
integrity and plasticity and dendritic complexity. Other research eluci­
dated that dendritic complexity and synaptic plasticity are impaired in 
APOE4 expressing mice (Wolfe et al., 2018). There is mounting evidence 
that APOE4 contributes to AD pathogenesis through inhibiting Aβ 
clearance and promoting Aβ aggregation. In addition to the effects on Aβ 
and tau pathology, APOE4 may directly affect neurons and neuronal 
networks (Najm et al., 2019). Current studies involving APOE-targeted 
AD therapeutic regimens are intended to mediate the quantity and lip­
idation of APOE, the interaction between APOE and Aβ, and the 
expression of APOE receptor (Yamazaki et al., 2019). 
Neuroinflammation 
Studies on the correlation between neuroinflammation and neuro­
degeneration demonstrated that chronic inflammatory response in the 
brain may be another pathological insult of AD. Therefore, the inflam­
matory mechanism of AD has been proposed. Microglial, one type of glia 
cells, accounts for about 10 to 15 percent of all cells in the brain, and as 
the hub of the central nervous system and immune system, microglial 
cell are in a pre-excited or activated state in AD-related animal models, 
which could lead to severe inflammatory responses in the aging brain 
(Damani et al., 2011; Magalingam et al., 2018). On the one hand, acti­
vated microglia can reduce the formation of neuritis spots by phagocy­
tosis of deposited amyloid β protein. However, at the same time, 
microglia can produce a tremendous number of inflammatory factors, 
such as IL-1, IL-6, IL-3, tumor necrosis factor (TNF-α) and nitric oxide 
(NO), etc. Overexpression of these factors can cause neurotoxicity and 
damage neurons (Lee et al., 2002). Dead neurons release microglia ac­
tivators, which in turn stimulate the glial proliferation and create a cycle 
of inflammatory neurotoxicity, thereby exacerbating neuronal degen­
eration. According to the results of cell surface pattern receptors 
screened by RT-PCR and Western blot, the main up-regulated receptor 
proteins in bone marrow-derived macrophages were Marco, CD63, 
TLR8, TLR4 (Van et al., 2021). The up-regulated proteins in primary 
microglia mainly include Marco, TLR2, TLR3, TLR4, and Scarb1, among 
which TLR2, TLR3, and TLR4 have been reported as an extracellular 
receptor involved in inflammasome activation (Frenkel et al., 2013; Yu 
and Ye, 2015). Currently, a genome-wide association study has shown 
that single nucleotide polymorphisms in modifying microglia function 
genes including TREM2, CD33, CR1, CLU, CD2AP, EPHA1, ABCA7, and 
INPP5D alter the risk of AD, suggesting that microglia may plays a vital 
role in AD development (Fig. 3) (Ju et al., 2022). 
Notably, in AD patients, Aβ is capable of interacting with microglial 
cells through the CD36-TLR4-TLR6 and the NLRP3 inflammatory com­
plex, resulting in cellular damage and the release of inflammation- 
triggering factors like TNF-α and IL-1, which ultimately leads to the 
development of AD pathology by eliciting several downstream effects in 
the brain (Saresella et al., 2016). Recent evidence has revealed that 
activation of NLRP3 complexes triggers the activation of M1 microglia, 
leading to increased Aβ deposition and cognitive dysfunction in AD 
mouse model, while NLRP3 gene knockout substantially attenuated 
spatial memory deficits and reduced Aβ deposition (Tan et al., 2013). 
Hence, the NLRP3 inflammasome emerges as a promising molecular 
target for neuroprotection in AD, and developing compounds capable of 
precisely regulating NLRP3 inflammasome activation holds significant 
prospects in mitigating AD advancement. 
The correlation between thyroid function and AD 
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) is negatively correlated with 
cerebral blood flow and cerebral glucose metabolism, which affects 
cognitive function (Chaker et al., 2016; Choi et al., 2020). Thyroid 
hormones are involved in interfering with insulin signaling pathways of 
the blood brain barrier (H. J. Choi et al., 2017). There is a link between 
the onset of AD and the hypothalamus-pituitary-thyroid axis (Baksi and 
Pradhan, 2021). Haji et al. (2015) found that cerebral blood flow in 
temporal lobe and thalamus decreased significantly in AD patients with 
subclinical hypothyroidism, while cerebral blood flow in inferior 
Fig. 3. Role of APOE and microglia in AD. APOE is mainly secreted by astrocytes and microglia, and lipidated by ABCA1. Lipidated APOE can bind to Aβ and cell 
surface receptors such as LRP1, LDLR, VLDLR and TREM2 in microglia and neuron. Aβ deposition in peripheral vascular would lead to CAA and impair blood 
vessel function. 
Q. Huang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

Phytomedicine 132 (2024) 155822
5
temporal lobe, cingulate gyrus and frontal lobe decreased significantly 
in AD patients without subclinical hypothyroidism. That is, subclinical 
hypothyroidism may affect cerebral blood perfusion in areas associated 
with memory function. Evidences showed that low levels of free 
thyroxine and high levels of TSH seem to be correlated with AD-specific 
brain changes even in the case of clinically normal thyroid function (J. 
Y. Choi et al., 2017). 
The role of MicroRNA in AD 
MicroRNA, a group of non-coding single-stranded small RNAs about 
22 nucleotides long, does not encode protein synthesis and regulates 
protein expression through binding to the 3′ untranslated region (UTR) 
of target genes, which is highly conservative and has a complex regu­
latory system (Dela et al., 2012; Zhao et al., 2020a). MicroRNA is 
involved in cell development, proliferation, differentiation, develop­
ment, metabolism, infection, immune cell apoptosis, organ biogenesis, 
cancer, senile degenerative diseases or other diseases (Femminella et al., 
2015; Huang et al., 2011; Maes et al., 2009). The increase of APP leads to 
the increase of Aβ level, which results in the degeneration of synaptic 
dysfunctions and ultimately the decline of cognitive function (Nicolas 
and Hassan, 2014). Currently, the cause of Aβ production of APP via 
β-secretase pathway is still unknown, but many studies suggest that the 
expression of APP is regulated by miRNA (H´ebert et al., 2009). In recent 
years, studies have showed that miRNA like miR-200b, miR-429, and 
miR-20a family could inhibit APP expression (H´ebert et al., 2009; Li 
et al., 2018; Patel et al., 2019). 
Other theories 
Swerdlow and Khan initially proposed the mitochondrial cascade 
hypothesis in 2004, suggesting that mitochondrial function could 
impact APP expression and Aβ aggregation in sporadic Alzheimer’s 
disease, and this hypothesis claims that the pace of mitochondrial 
function decline in individuals influences the progression of AD (Perez 
and Swerdlow, 2019). Specifically, individuals experiencing a rapid 
decline in mitochondrial function are more vulnerable to AD pathologies 
and may develop the disease at a younger age compared to those with a 
slower decline in mitochondrial function. According to this hypothesis, 
Aβ is regarded as a hallmark of brain aging rather than the direct cause 
of AD, and this theory proposes that mitochondrial dysfunction initiates 
the process of Aβ accumulation. Therefore, modulating mitochondrial 
function may offer a means to halt the progression of AD (Cadonic et al., 
2016). Additionally, Metal ion hypothesis should also be given attention 
because within the central nervous system (CNS), essential metallic el­
ements like copper, zinc, and iron play indispensable roles in aiding 
enzymatic activity, mitochondrial function, and neural activity (Ward 
et al., 2014). For instance, research revealed that iron accumulation in 
brains was observed and heightened iron concentrations was primarily 
localized in specific brain areas like the parietal cortex, motor cortex, 
and hippocampus by employing magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). 
Moreover, investigations into gene mutations associated with iron 
metabolism has linked iron dysregulation to neuronal death, a hallmark 
of neurodegenerative diseases like AD (Zeineh, et al., 2015). Based on 
this, the idea that therapeutic iron chelation could be a new strategy for 
the treatment of AD (Liu et al., 2018). To date, FDA-approved drugs for 
the therapy of AD have been limited to AChE inhibitors with donepezil 
as the exemplar, and N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists 
with memantine being the primary representative (Di et al., 2013; Tan 
et al., 2014). Recent setbacks and the limited advancements in phase III 
clinical trials underscore the necessity to explore alternative approaches 
for AD treatment. 
Neuroprotective effect of natural compounds in AD 
Although AChE inhibitors have been shown to modulate cognitive 
function, they do not stifle the progression of AD. These treatments only 
provide temporary palliative treatment to alleviate the cognitive 
impairment associated with AD. Moreover, they are associated with a 
variety of side effects. Therefore, researchers began to seek for anti-AD 
drug candidates such as natural compounds (Fig. 4) that can effectively 
treat the multi-level pathogenesis of AD. (Huang et al., 2021; Panda and 
Jhanji, 2020; Tundis et al., 2018). 
Phenolic compounds 
Polyphenols have been reported much attention in recent years for 
their actions (Zhao et al., 2020b). The phenolic extract including indo­
line amides from Portulaca oleracea can reduce the oxidative stress of 
aging mice induced by d-galactose/NaNO2, prolong the life span of 
mice, and enhance cognitive function (Table 1) (Wang et al., 2017). 
Cichoric acid (CA) is a natural phenolic acid isolated from chicory and 
echinacea. CA reduces the memory impairment and amyloidosis caused 
by lipopolysaccharide by inhibiting the NF-κB transcription pathway, 
and has a protective effect against memory damage and neuron loss (Qi 
et al., 2019). Resveratrol, one plant polyphenol derived from Vitis 
vinifera, contains two phenolic rings with an ethylene bridge, which has 
been reported to play a crucial role in the activation of the transcript of 
longevity-associated genes like SIRT-1, SIRT-2, and SIRT-3, and the 
suppression of mitochondrial dysfunction (da Rosa et al., 2022; Ganesan 
et al., 2021). Besides, it has neuroprotective function through exhibiting 
antioxidant ability in microglial cell line (Song et al., 2014). These 
studies indicates that resveratrol provides therapeutic potential in AD. 
Evidences showed that Pomegranates (Punica granatum Linn) consisting 
of high concentrations of polyphenols compared with other fruits, could 
prominently relieve AD pathology by inhibiting neuroinflammation, 
reducing cerebral Aβ levels, and improving synaptic plasticity in 
APPsw/Tg 2576 mice, which implied that pomegranates can be used as 
an alternative treatment in AD (Braidy et al., 2016). 
Curcumin, also called diferuloylmethane derived from Zingiberaceae 
family, consists of two phenolic hydroxyl groups responsible for its 
antioxidant activity. And it can significantly retard AD pathology by 
reducing amyloid plaque deposition and Aβ42 oligomer formation, 
attenuating tau hyperphosphorylation, and modifying microglial activ­
ity, which is seen as a potential preventative treatment in AD (Venigalla 
et al., 2015). However, some disadvantages of curcumin including low 
bioavailability, chemical instability, and rapid intestinal metabolism 
need to be overcame before it is used as the therapy of AD (Tang and 
Taghibiglou, 2017). Supplement of epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) 
extracted from green tea markedly decreased Aβ levels and modulated 
tau profiles in TgAPPsw transgenic mice. Besides, radial arm water maze 
(RAWM) testing associated with spatial memory showed that EGCG 
provided cognitive benefit to AD mice, which indicated that EGCG can 
be used as a propitious therapeutic agent for AD (Khan et al., 2020; 
Rezai-Zadeh et al., 2008, 2005). Apigenin (4,5,7-trihydroxyflavone), a 
flavonoid stemmed from parsley and celery (Kim et al., 2019), has been 
proven to improve neuroprotective potential by reducing the activation 
of caspase-3 and controlling the inflammatory response of microglia and 
astrocyte (Dourado et al., 2020). Additionally, apigenin can prevent Aβ 
burden and amyloidogenic process, and can restore ERK/CREB/BDNF 
pathway to rescue learning and memory deficits in APP/PS1 mice (Zhao 
et al., 2013), which indicated that apigenin appears to represent a 
crucial neuroimmunomodulatory medication for AD. Baicalein (5,6, 
7-trihydroxyflavone) is a flavonoid found in abundance in the roots of 
Scutellaria baicalensis, which has been shown to modulate cognitive 
performance by increasing the processing of APP α-secretase and sup­
pressing the production of Aβ in Tg2576 transgenic AD mice (Zhang 
et al., 2013). Also, Baicalein was found to significantly alter the levels of 
ACh and total Aβ, suppress the activity of 12/15 lipoxygenase and 
glycogen synthase kinase 3β, and prevent tau phosphorylation to 
improve memory deficits in AD mice, suggesting that baicalein has po­
tential neuroprotective effect (Gu et al., 2016; Zhou et al., 2016). 
Q. Huang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

Phytomedicine 132 (2024) 155822
6
Phenolic compounds mainly exert their therapeutic effects on AD by 
inhibiting Aβ aggregation and AChE activity. Phenolic compounds act 
on the amino acid residues in AChE through hydrogen bonds and hy­
drophobic and π-π interaction, and hydroxyl groups in the phenolic 
compound is believed to strengthen AChE inhibition, which illustrate 
the functional capacity of the majority of phenolic compounds (Katalini´c 
et al., 2010). Moreover, polyphenolic compounds possess evident anti­
oxidant properties, which may help mitigate the oxidative stress 
observed in the brains of individuals with AD. While polyphenolic 
therapies might aid in restoring ROS equilibrium, they may not offer 
complete prevention of AD due to intricate biological mechanisms un­
derlying AD (Cassidy et al., 2020). Further investigations are necessary 
to unveil the molecular biology and biochemical pathways through 
which polyphenols interact with AD. 
Natural polysaccharides 
In recent years, polysaccharides have attracted much attention 
owing to their remarkable pharmacological activities. Many poly­
saccharides originated from natural substances have shown extraordi­
nary curative effects in alleviating neurodegenerative diseases (Table 1). 
Pleurotus ostreatusl. polysaccharide (POP) palliates cognitive losses in 
rats induced by d-galactose and AlCl3 by reducing oxidative stress, 
upregulating protein phosphatase 2A, and reducing APP and the 
expression of β-APP cleaving enzyme 1 (BACE1) and glycogen synthase 
kinase 3beta (GSK3β) (Zhang et al., 2016). The polysaccharide extracted 
from Pleurotus ostreatusl. contains a relatively high proportion of 
galactose and uronic acid, which reduced the production of reactive 
oxygen species and improved cell survival, thus revealing a protective 
effect on lead-induced oxidative toxicity of PC12 cells. In addition, POP 
also alleviated cognitive dysfunction in lead poisoned rats. In addition, 
administration of POP (600 mg/kg/d) can restore the lead-induced loss 
of dendritic spines in rats (Niego et al., 2021; Rang et al., 2022). Den­
drobium officinale polysaccharide (DOP) is capable of regulating the 
activation of BV2 microglia, promoting the transition from M1 pheno­
type to M2 phenotype, and enhancing the Aβ clearance rate in response 
to Aβ injury (Feng et al., 2019). It can also alleviate cognitive impair­
ment in senescence-accelerated mouse prone 8 (SAMP8) mice. The 
accumulation of Aβ and phosphorylated tau protein in the hippocampus 
of SAMP8 mice was also reduced. In addition, DOP could upregulate the 
expression of the Nrf2/HO-1 pathway and inhibit the activation of as­
trocytes and microglia in the absence of estrogen where d-gal­
actose-induced cognitive decline was caused by ovariectomy. At the 
same time, it can reduce oxidative stress and neuroinflammation (Sun 
et al., 2022). Flammulina velutipes polysaccharides (FVP) can improve 
scopolamine-induced impairment of learning and memory via regu­
lating the composition of the intestinal microflora. In addition, FVP and 
FVP microbiota modulated IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-6, IL-10, and other cytokines 
to inhibit neuroinflammation (Su et al., 2018). Also, FVP can restore 
ACh level by increasing ChAT activity and decreasing AChE activity, and 
can activate signaling pathway that was correlated with learning and 
memory by elevating connexin 36 and p-CaMK II expression in rats 
induced by scopolamine (Yang et al., 2015). Similarly, the combined 
treatment of FVP and ginsenosides can dramatically improve the 
cognitive ability of AD induced by d-galactose. The antioxidant effect of 
the combination group was enhanced, and the expression levels of Bax, 
cytochrome C, caspase-3, caspase-9 and apoptosis-inducing factors were 
significantly reduced. Moreover, the expression level of Bcl-2 was 
significantly increased (Zhang et al., 2018). These results indicates that 
the compatibility of ginsenosides can conspicuously improve the pro­
tective effect of FVP on AD. In APP23 mice, Tg2576 transgenic AD 
mouse models and APP/PS1 transgenic AD mouse models, the impaired 
cognition and learning ability were improved after trehalose treatment. 
Additionally, trehalose treatment significantly reduced the production 
of Aβ and the formation of neuritic plaques. Trehalose prominently 
reduced Aβ40 and Aβ42 generations, and significantly lessen Aβ pro­
duction in HAW and 20E2 cells (Liu et al., 2020). Trehalose promoted 
the expression of APP in stable cells which overexpress wild-type 
APP695 and Swedish mutant APP695 and the production of c-terminal 
fragment (CTF) in a dose-dependent manner, and affected APP pro­
cessing in vitro and in vivo. In addition, after trehalose treatment, the 
expression of synaptophysin (a surrogate marker of synaptic vesicle 
protein and synapse) and doublecortin (a reliable marker of neuro­
genesis) in the hippocampus was significantly increased. Promoting 
neurogenesis is a feasible strategy to treat AD-related cognitive 
impairment (Castaneda et al., 2021; Iyaswamy et al., 2022). More 
Fig. 4. Chemical structures of natural compounds used in Alzheimer’s disease.  
Q. Huang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

Phytomedicine 132 (2024) 155822
7
Table 1 
Effects of natural compounds on Alzheimer’s disease.  
Effective material 
Source 
Function 
Model 
References 
AMP 
Astragalus membranaceus 
Diminish neuroinflammation, reduces astrocyte hyperplasia and 
the activation of microglia 
db/db mice 
Guo et al., 2019; P.P. Liu 
et al., 2019 
Antarctic krill oil 
Antarctic krill 
Down-regulate the expression of APP and BACE1, and inhibit the 
expression of iNOS and COX-2 
Mice induced by LPS 
H.J. Choi et al., 2017 
Apigenin 
Parsley and celery 
Reduce the activation of caspase 3, control the inflammatory 
response of microglia and astrocyte, prevent Aβ burden and 
amyloidogenic process, and restore ERK/CREB/BDNF pathway 
APP/PS1 mice 
Dourado et al., 2020;  
Zhao et al., 2013 
Baicalein 
Scutellaria baicalensis 
Increase the processing of APP α-secretase, suppress Aβ 
production, the activity of 12/15 lipoxygenase and glycogen 
synthase kinase 3β, and prevent tau phosphorylation 
Tg2576 transgenic AD 
mice 
Gu et al., 2016; Zhang 
et al., 2013; Zhou et al., 
2016 
Banana pulp pectin 
Banana 
Improve memory retention by preventing aluminum absorption 
from the gastrointestinal tract and reducing aluminum 
accumulation in the brain 
Mice induced by AlCl3 
Zeng et al., 2018 
Cichoric acid 
Chicory and echinacea 
Reduce amyloidosis, maintain cellular oxidative balance, and 
block the NF-κB transcription pathway 
Mice induced by LPS 
Qi et al., 2019 
Clove oil 
Clove 
Ameliorate learning and memory deficits, and decrease oxidative 
stress 
Scopolamine-induced 
mice 
Halder et al., 2011 
Curcumin 
Zingiberaceae family 
reduce amyloid plaque deposition, attenuate tau 
hyperphosphorylation, and modify microglial activity 
APP/PS1 transgenic 
mice 
Tang and Taghibiglou, 
2017; Venigalla et al., 
2015 
DOP 
Dendrobium officinale 
Enhance the Aβ clearance rate, up-regulate the expression of the 
Nrf2/HO-1 pathway, and inhibit the activation of astrocytes and 
microglia 
SAMP8 mice 
Feng et al., 2019; Sun 
et al., 2022 
Epigallocatechin-3- 
gallate (EGCG) 
Green tea 
Decrease Aβ levels and modulate tau profiles 
TgAPPsw transgenic 
mice 
Khan et al., 2020;  
Rezai-Zadeh et al., 2008, 
2005 
FO 
Onion, garlic, and banana 
Attenuate Aβ density, and increase plasma antioxidant levels 
Mice induced by d- 
galactose 
Paiva et al., 2020 
Fucoidan 
Brown algae 
Mediation of the cholinergic system, oxidative stress, Bcl-2 
family protein translocation, and caspase-3 activation 
Aβ-induced AD model 
mice 
Park et al., 2019;  
Subaraja et al., 2020 
FVP 
Flammulina velutipes 
Modulate IL-1β, TNF-α, IL-6, IL-10 and other cytokines, restore 
ACh level, and elevate connexin 36 and p-CaMK II expression 
Scopolamine-induced 
mice 
Su et al., 2018; Yang 
et al., 2015 
GLP 
Ganoderma lucidum 
Expedite the proliferation of neural precursor cells, promote 
neurogenesis, and potentiate FGFR signaling 
APP/PS1 transgenic 
mice 
Huang et al., 2017 
Indoline amides 
Portulaca oleracea 
Reduce the oxidative stress, prolong the life span, and enhance 
cognitive function 
Senescent mice injected 
with d-galactose/ 
NaNO2 
Wang et al., 2017 
LBP 
Lycium barbarum 
Reduce Aβ levels, promote neurogenesis, and inhibit the 
excessive activation of microglia and astrocytes 
APP/PS1 transgenic 
mice 
Chen et al., 2014; Qi 
et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 
2020 
Lemon oil 
Lemon 
Reduce brain AChE activity and increase plasma corticosterone 
levels 
Scopolamine-induced 
mice 
Falls et al., 2018 
LJP 
Lonicera japonica 
Pause the loss of neurons and increase the expression of A-TG5, 
Beclin-1, Vps34 and LC3-II 
Mice induced by LPS 
J. Wang et al., 2021;  
Zhang et al., 2022 
MOS 
Konjac and the outer 
membrane of bacteria, plant 
or yeast 
Decrease Aβ accumulation in cortex and hippocampus, and 
regulate the gut microbiome 
5xFAD transgenic AD 
mice 
Liu et al., 2021 
Okra polysaccharides 
Okra 
Reverse the metabolic disorders and cognitive impairment 
Aβ1–42 induced AD 
model mice 
Yan et al., 2020 
OMO 
Morinda officinalis 
Mitigate tissue swelling and neuronal apoptosis in the brain, and 
inhibit Aβ1–42 expression 
APP/PS1 transgenic 
mice 
Xin et al., 2018 
PMP 
Millettia pulchra 
Reduce oxidative stress and Aβdeposition, improve synaptic 
plasticity, and reverse the abnormality of ACh level and AChE 
activity 
Mice induced by d- 
galactose 
Lin et al., 2014 
Pomegranates extract 
Punica granatum Linn 
Inhibit neuroinflammation, reduce cerebral Aβ levels, and 
improve synaptic plasticity 
APPsw/Tg 2576 mice 
Braidy et al., 2016 
POP 
Pleurotus ostreatus l. 
Reduce oxidative stress, up-regulate protein phosphatase 2A, and 
decrease the expression of BACE1 and GSK3β 
Mice induced by d- 
galactose and AlCl3 
Zhang et al., 2016 
Resveratrol 
Vitis vinifera 
Reduce Aβ plaque aggregation and activate microglia in the 
hippocampus and cortex 
APP/PS1 transgenic 
mice 
da Rosa et al., 2022; Song 
et al., 2014 
SCA 
Panamanian marine 
cyanobacterium 
Improve spatial learning, inhibit the activation and recruitment 
of DRP1 and FIS1 proteins 
APP/PS1 mice and 
Aβ25–35-induced PC12 
cells 
Chen et al., 2019; Gromek 
et al., 2016; Liang et al., 
2021 
Trehalose 
Many species of plants and 
animals such as mushroom 
Reduce the production of Aβ and the formation of neuritic 
plaques 
APP23 mice, Tg2576 
mice and APP/PS1 
transgenic mice 
Castaneda et al., 2021;  
Iyaswamy et al., 2022;  
Liu et al., 2020; 
UMOS 
Alginate-derived 
polymannuronate 
Decrease Aβ1–42 expression, reduce the level of APP and BACE1, 
and promote autophagy 
N2a-sw cell 
Bi et al., 2021; J. Wang 
et al., 2021 
WGOS 
Ginseng 
Regulate the inflammatory response in the brain, and prevent the 
activation of astrocytes 
Scopolamine-induced 
mice 
Xu et al., 2016  
Q. Huang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

Phytomedicine 132 (2024) 155822
8
detailed molecular mechanisms are required to understand the afore­
mentioned biological activities. 
Ganoderma lucidum polysaccharides (GLP) can expedite the prolif­
eration of neural precursor cells (NPC) in transgenic AD mice and pro­
mote neurogenesis, thus alleviating cognitive impairment. GLP can 
enhance the fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (FGFR1) and its down­
stream extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and AKT cascade. 
The AD model mice were induced by Aβ using high-fat diet (Huang et al., 
2017). High-fat diet can drastically aggravate the metabolic disorders of 
AD mice, and okra polysaccharides can reverse the metabolic disorders 
and cognitive impairment of AD mice caused by high-fat diet (Yan et al., 
2020). The polysaccharide extracted from Lonicera japonica (LJP) 
significantly reduced the learning and memory impairment and 
improved the loss of neurons and injury-related behavioral changes in 
mice induced by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (Zhang et al., 2022). Nissl 
staining showed that the control group had lost neurons and disordered 
cell arrangement. LJP can alleviate the pathological changes of mouse 
nerve cells. Compared to the LPS group, the LJP group significantly 
enhanced the expression of A-TG5, Beclin-1, Vps34 and LC3-II (M. Wang 
et al., 2021). Lycium barbarum polysaccharides (LBP) can prevent 
cognitive and memory impairment caused by scopolamine, and reduce 
Aβ levels in APP/PS1 transgenic mice. Besides, LBP can improve their 
cognitive functions, and have neuroprotective effects on behavioral 
disorders caused by focal cerebral ischemia in mice (Chen et al., 2014; 
Zhou et al., 2020). LBP pretreatment can promote neurogenesis, 
improve memory and motor coordination disturbances, and inhibit the 
excessive activation of microglia and astrocytes after middle cerebral 
artery occlusion (MCAO) (Qi et al., 2022). In addition, it can restore the 
synaptic dysfunction of the hippocampal CA3-CA1 pathway. The 
anti-inflammatory effect of LBP is partly achieved by inhibiting the 
expression and activation of P65, NF-κB and P38 MAPK in the hippo­
campus (Zhao et al., 2017). 
Astragalus membranaceus polysaccharide (AMP) can improve cogni­
tive dysfunction by changing the intestinal flora of db/db diabetic mice 
(Guo et al., 2019). AMP can also be used to improve neuroinflammation 
induced by metabolic stress, thereby improving the behavior of meta­
bolically stressed transgenic mice. In the brain, administration of AMP 
reduced metabolic stress-induced astrocyte hyperplasia and the activa­
tion of microglia near the plaque (Y. Liu et al., 2019). Fucoidan, 
extracted from brown algae like Fucus vesiculosus (Zhao et al., 2020a), 
had a good neuroprotective effect on Aβ-induced AD model rats and 
d-galactose-induced learning and memory disorders (Subaraja et al., 
2020). The mechanism was related to the mediation of the cholinergic 
system, oxidative stress, Bcl-2 family protein translocation, and 
caspase-3 activation (Park et al., 2019). The polysaccharide isolated 
from Millettia pulchra (PMP) can efficaciously improve the cognitive 
dysfunction and neuropathological damage of mice caused by d-galac­
tose by reducing oxidative stress and Aβ content and deposition, 
improving synaptic plasticity barriers and inhibiting inflammation (Lin 
et al., 2014). Banana pulp pectin can significantly improve memory 
retention by preventing the absorption of aluminum from the gastroin­
testinal tract and reducing its accumulation in the brain to protect 
aluminum-exposed mice from cognitive impairment caused by 
aluminum (Zeng et al., 2018). In general, it is crucial to conduct addi­
tional isolation of the single components of these polysaccharides, 
thereby elucidating the structure-function relationship of poly­
saccharide activity and their specific targets of action. 
Natural oligosaccharides 
Unsaturated mannose oligosaccharides (UMOS) can significantly 
inhibit the aggregation of Aβ1–42 oligomers in AD cells, reduce the 
expression of Aβ1–42, and the levels of APP and BACE1, and promote 
autophagy including the inactivation of the mTOR signaling pathway 
and the coalescence of autophagosomes and lysosomes (Bi et al., 2021; 
M. Wang et al., 2021). The pretreatment of water-soluble ginseng 
oligosaccharides (WGOS) obtained from ginseng has a protective effect 
on the learning and memory impairment of Morris water maze and new 
object recognition tasks induced by scopolamine (Chen et al., 2020; Xu 
et al., 2016). In addition, WGOS regulates inflammation in the brain by 
down-regulating high expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines IL-1β 
and IL-6 mRNA in the hippocampus induced by scopolamine and pre­
venting the activation of astrocytes, hence learning and memory disor­
ders 
were 
improved 
(Veer 
and 
Singh, 
2020). 
Dietary 
fructo-oligosaccharide (FO), primarily obtained from vegetables and 
fruits (such as onion, garlic, and banana), can reduce brain Aβ and in­
crease plasma antioxidant levels to improve cognitive performance in 
d-galactose treatment of Balb/c mice. Also, FO showed favorable 
neurological impacts by augmenting acetylcholine, serotonin, and 
adrenaline levels, and mitigating CA1 hippocampal injury. (Paiva et al., 
2020). With the treatment of mannan oligosaccharide (MOS) in the 
5xFAD transgenic AD mice, the cognitive impairment can be soothed by 
decreasing the accumulation of Aβ in cortex and hippocampus. Notably, 
MOS effectively restored brain redox status and attenuated neuro­
inflammatory responses. Furthermore, MOS can regulate the gut 
microbiome and intensify the production of short chain fatty acids 
related to the neuroprotective function. These suggests that MOS can be 
used to treat neurodegenerative diseases (Liu et al., 2021). It has been 
demonstrated that oligosaccharides from Morinda officinalis (OMO), 
extracted from a natural herb, can ameliorate the memory of APP/PS1 
transgenic mice. In addition, OMO can mitigate tissue swelling and 
neuronal apoptosis in the brain and the expression of Aβ1–42 marker 
showing in histological changes (Xin et al., 2018). 
Peptides 
Santacruzamate A (SCA), a peptide-like compound, is obtained from 
marine cyanobacterium Symploca sp. and its molecular structure con­
tains three groups including an ethyl carbamate terminus and a phe­
nethylamine cap group. SCA was demonstrated to show a substantial 
neuroprotective activity via behavior testing in AD models (Chen et al., 
2019). Specifically, administration of SCA can significantly ameliorate 
spatial learning deficits in APP/PS1mice (Gromek et al., 2016). Also, 
SCA can attenuate Aβ-induced neurotoxicity in PC12 cells through 
inhibiting the activation and recruitment of dynamin-related protein 1 
(DRP1) and mitochondrial fission 1 (FIS1) proteins (Liang et al., 2021). 
Lipids 
Lemon oil, particularly rich in ascorbic acid and flavonoids, can 
significantly inhibit brain AChE activity, and increase plasma cortico­
sterone levels in stressed and non-stressed mice, thus changing and 
reversing the amnesia caused by scopolamine. In addition, histopatho­
logical examination confirmed the disappearance of amyloid plaques 
caused by scopolamine (Falls et al., 2018). Clove oil, with eugenol as its 
main component, can remarkably inhibit the activity of AChE, reduce 
oxidative damage, and recover the activity of mitochondrial respiratory 
enzyme complex (I-IV) so as to improve the cognitive impairment in rats 
induced by colchicine (Kumar et al., 2016). Besides, clove oil was able to 
ameliorate learning and memory deficits caused by scopolamine 
through decreasing oxidative stress (Halder et al., 2011). Antarctic krill 
oil, mainly containing eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) and docosahexae­
noic acid (DHA), can rescue cognitive impairment in mice induced by 
lipopolysaccharide through down-regulating the expression of APP and 
BACE1 in the body, inhibiting the production of Aβ1–42 peptide, and 
inhibiting neuroinflammation and oxidative stress. Krill oil treatment 
inhibited the expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and 
cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) induced by LPS. Krill oil can also inhibit the 
degradation of IκB and the transport of p50 and p65 into the nucleus of 
the brain cells of mice injected with LPS (H. J. Choi et al., 2017). 
In short, nature compounds have the potentials to modulate signal 
pathways related to AD pathological progression, such as NF-κB, Nrf2, 
Q. Huang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

Phytomedicine 132 (2024) 155822
9
mTOR pathways. Some compounds can modulate the crosstalk between 
pathways through multitarget synergy, thereby reducing oxidative 
stress damage and preserving a balance in inflammatory responses to 
ameliorate cognitive impairment in AD patients. Further investigation is 
required to fully explore the therapeutic potential of these compounds in 
clinical trials, as well as the potential benefits of combining them for AD 
treatment. 
Conclusion and perspectives 
The pathogenic mechanisms of AD are so complicated and intermix 
that novel agents based on single-target for AD treatment may not work 
well. To understand the complicated details of pathogenesis, more in­
clusive fundamental research on AD is still needed. Although tremen­
dous therapeutic regimens have been investigated, there is still no 
efficacious agents available. Since single target drugs fail to decipher the 
complexity of AD pathology, it is likely that multi-target approaches 
targeting multiple mechanism of action could be beneficial in AD 
treatment. Recent studies have indicated that particular dietary patterns 
and lifestyle behaviors, like the consumption of saturated fats, smoking 
and alcohol abuse, are correlated with the risk of the development of AD 
(Kivipelto et al., 2018). Recent research discovered that sleep efficiency 
can fully mediate the connection between delta-frequency neural ac­
tivity and processing speed capabilities in AD patients, indicating that 
sleep disturbances play a crucial role in the neurophysiological alter­
ations of AD (Rempe et al., 2023). Other research showed that higher 
levels of saturated long-chain fatty acids (LCFAs) in the bloodstream, 
such as C14:0, C16:0, and C18:0, were found in AD patients compared to 
participants with mild cognitive impairment (MCI), implying that 
increased levels of saturated LCFAs contribute to AD pathology (Fan 
et al., 2023). Moreover, a deep learning-based approach called 
Circular-Sliding Window Association Test (c-SWAT) was developed to 
identify potential lipid biomarkers for AD, which could provide novel 
insights for preventing and treating AD (Jo et al., 2023). It is estimated 
that environmental and lifestyle risk factors contribute to almost 
one-third of the phenotypic variance, hence these factors should be 
considered in the design of gene therapy clinical trials for AD patients 
(Andrews et al., 2023; Quan et al., 2023). Nearly half of dementia cases 
could potentially be prevented through lifestyle interventions, such as 
dietary adjustments (for example, intake of vitamin E), regular physical 
activity, and cognitive training (Angelopoulou et al., 2021). Although 
the current scientific literature may not provide a complete picture, 
choosing a healthy lifestyle is imperative in preventing AD. 
Recent discoveries revealed substantial modifications in global 
signal topography and demonstrated the correlation between changes in 
regional and global neuronal function in AD progression, offering a fresh 
viewpoint for treating AD (Chen et al., 2023). Furthermore, the 
advancement of artificial intelligence (AI) and detection techniques 
make it more effective to take measures against AD in advance, such as 
gender-oriented early interventions (Estiri et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 
2023). This review enumerates the effects of natural products on 
neurodegenerative diseases with particular emphasis on AD. The ther­
apeutic effects of natural compounds have been reported in pre-clinical 
trials. However, the clinical evaluation of natural compounds in AD 
patients is an intricate work because these patients may use multiple 
approaches simultaneously. Moreover, long term intake of natural 
compounds might cause some pernicious effects on the body, and 
limited information about bioactivity, distribution and effectiveness of 
natural compounds has been investigated in clinical trials. Nevertheless, 
the intervention of natural compounds in AD patients is a prospective 
method due to its low toxicity and safety. Therefore, natural products 
may be considered as an alternative treatment comparing to conven­
tional therapy in AD. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Qihui Huang: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft. 
Weihao Wu: Visualization. Yuxi Wen: Conceptualization. Suyue Lu: 
Visualization. Chao Zhao: Writing – review & editing, Supervision, 
Project administration. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence 
of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a 
potential conflict of interest. 
Acknowledgments 
The project was funded by Fujian ‘Young Eagle Program’ Youth Top 
Talent Program, Double First-Class Construction Plan (KSYLX013) of 
Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University, and FuXiaQuan Independent 
Innovation Demonstration Zone Collaborative Innovation Platform 
Project of Marine Important Functional Substance and Engineering 
Technology (2023FX0001). 
References 
Aliev, G., Priyadarshini, M., P Reddy, V., Grieg, N.H., Kaminsky, Y., Cacabelos, R., Md 
Ashraf, G., Jabir, N.R., Kamal, M.A., Nikolenko, V.N., Zamyatnin Jr., A.A., 
Benberin, V., Bachurin, S.O., 2014. Oxidative stress mediated mitochondrial and 
vascular lesions as markers in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease. Curr. Med. 
Chem. 21 (19), 2208–2217. 
Aluko, R.E., 2021. Food-derived acetylcholinesterase inhibitors as potential agents 
against Alzheimer’s disease. eFood 2 (2), 49–58. 
Andrews, S.J., Renton, A.E., Fulton-Howard, B., Podlesny-Drabiniok, A., Marcora, E., 
Goate, A.M., 2023. The complex genetic architecture of Alzheimer’s disease: novel 
insights and future directions. EBioMedicine 90, 104511. 
Angelopoulou, E., Paudel, Y.N., Papageorgiou, S.G., Piperi, C., 2021. APOE genotype and 
Alzheimer’s disease: the influence of lifestyle and environmental factors. ACS Chem. 
Neurosci. 12 (15), 2749–2764. 
Axelsen, P.H., Komatsu, H., Murray, I.V., 2011. Oxidative stress and cell membranes in 
the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease. Physiology 26 (1), 54–69. 
Baksi, S., Pradhan, A., 2021. Thyroid hormone: sex-dependent role in nervous system 
regulation and disease. Biol. Sex Differ. 12 (1), 1–13. 
Bartus, R.T., Dean III, R.L., Beer, B., Lippa, A.S., 1982. The cholinergic hypothesis of 
geriatric memory dysfunction. Science 217 (4558), 408–414. 
Bell, R.D., Zlokovic, B.V., 2009. Neurovascular mechanisms and blood-brain barrier 
disorder in Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Neuropathol 118 (1), 103–113. 
Bi, D., Yao, L., Lin, Z., Chi, L., Li, H., Xu, H., Du, X., Liu, Q., Hu, Z., Lu, J., Xu, X., 2021. 
Unsaturated mannuronate oligosaccharide ameliorates β-amyloid pathology through 
autophagy in Alzheimer’s disease cell models. Carbohydr. Polym. 251, 117124. 
Braidy, N., Essa, M.M., Poljak, A., Selvaraju, S., Al-Adawi, S., Manivasagm, T., 
Thenmozhi, A.J., Ooi, L., Sachdev, P., Guillemin, G.J., 2016. Consumption of 
pomegranates improves synaptic function in a transgenic mice model of Alzheimer’s 
disease. Oncotarget 7 (40), 64589–64604. 
Cadonic, C., Sabbir, M.G., Albensi, B.C., 2016. Mechanisms of mitochondrial dysfunction 
in Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurobiol. 53, 6078–6090. 
Calabr`o, M., Rinaldi, C., Santoro, G., Crisafulli, C., 2021. The biological pathways of 
Alzheimer disease: a review. AIMS Neurosci 8 (1), 86–132. 
Cassidy, L., Fernandez, F., Johnson, J.B., Naiker, M., Owoola, A.G., Broszczak, D.A., 
2020. Oxidative stress in alzheimer’s disease: a review on emergent natural 
polyphenolic therapeutics. Complement. Ther. Med. 49, 102294. 
Castaneda, A., Ferraz, R., Vieira, M., Cardoso, I., Vasconcelos, V., Martins, R., 2021. 
Bridging cyanobacteria to neurodegenerative diseases: a new potential source of 
bioactive compounds against Alzheimer’s disease. Mar. Drugs 19 (6), 343. 
Chaker, L., Wolters, F.J., Bos, D., Korevaar, T.I., Hofman, A., van der Lugt, A., 
Koudstaal, P.J., Franco, O.H., Dehghan, A., Vernooij, M.W., Peeters, R.P., Arfan 
Ikram, M., 2016. Thyroid function and the risk of dementia: the Rotterdam Study. 
Neurology 87 (16), 1688–1695. 
Chen, H., Yang, H., Fan, D., Deng, J., 2020. The anticancer activity and mechanisms of 
ginsenosides: an updated review. eFood 1 (3), 226–241. 
Chen, L., Liu, Y.C., Tan, H., Zhang, Y., Xu, J., Liu, W.L., Li, Z.Y., Li, W.P., 2019. 
Santacruzamate A ameliorates AD-like pathology by enhancing ER stress tolerance 
through regulating the functions of KDELR and Mia40-ALR in vivo and in vitro. Front. 
Cell. Neurosci. 13, 61. 
Chen, P., Zhao, K., Zhang, H., Wei, Y., Wang, P., Wang, D., Song, C., Yang, H., Zhang, Z., 
Yao, H., Qu, Y., Kang, X., Du, K., Fan, L., Han, T., Yu, C., Zhou, B., Jiang, T., Zhou, Y., 
Lu, J., Han, Y., Zhang, X., Liu, B., Liu, Y., 2023. Altered global signal topography in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Ebiomedicine 89, 104455. 
Chen, W., Cheng, X., Chen, J., Yi, X., Nie, D., Sun, X., Qin, J., Tian, M., Jin, G., Zhang, X., 
2014. Lycium barbarum polysaccharides prevent memory and neurogenesis 
impairments in scopolamine-treated rats. PLoS One 9 (2), e88076. 
Q. Huang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

Phytomedicine 132 (2024) 155822
10
Choi, B.W., Kang, S., Kim, H.W., 2020. Relationship between serum TSH level and 
Alzheimer disease pathology: human neuropathology/clinic-pathologic correlations. 
Alzheimer’s Dementia 16, e041210. 
Choi, H.J., Byun, M.S., Yi, D., Sohn, B.K., Lee, J.H., Lee, J.Y., Kim, Y.K., Lee, D.Y., KBASE 
Research Group, 2017a. Associations of thyroid hormone serum levels with in-vivo 
Alzheimer’s disease pathologies. Alzheimer’s Res. Ther. 9 (1), 1–9. 
Choi, J.Y., Jang, J.S., Son, D.J., Im, H.S., Kim, J.Y., Park, J.E., Choi, W.R., Han, S.B., 
Hong, J.T, 2017b. Antarctic krill oil diet protects against lipopolysaccharide-induced 
oxidative stress, neuroinflammation and cognitive impairment. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 18 
(12), 2554. 
Cullen, N.C., Novak, P., Tosun, D., Kovacech, B., Hanes, J., Kontsekova, E., Fresser, M., 
Ropele, S., Feldman, H.H., Schmidt, R., Winblad, B., Zilka, N., 2024. Efficacy 
assessment of an active tau immunotherapy in Alzheimer’s disease patients with 
amyloid and tau pathology: a post hoc analysis of the “ADAMANT” randomised, 
placebo-controlled, double-blind, multi-centre, phase 2 clinical trial. EBioMedicine 
99, 104923. 
da Rosa, M.M., de Amorim, L.C., de Oliveira Alves, J.V., da Silva Aguiar, I.F., da Silva 
Oliveira, F.G., da Silva, M.V., dos Santos, M.T.C., 2022. The promising role of natural 
products in Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Disord 7, 100049. 
Damani, M.R., Zhao, L., Fontainhas, A.M., Amaral, J., Fariss, R.N., Wong, W.T., 2011. 
Age-related alterations in the dynamic behavior of microglia. Aging Cell 10 (2), 
263–276. 
Deane, R., Zlokovic, B.V., 2007. Role of the blood-brain barrier in the pathogenesis of 
Alzheimer’s disease. Curr. Alzheimer Res. 4 (2), 191–197. 
Di Santo, S.G., Prinelli, F., Adorni, F., Caltagirone, C., Musicco, M., 2013. A meta-analysis 
of the efficacy of donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine, and memantine in relation to 
severity of Alzheimer’s disease. J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 35 (2), 349–361. 
Dourado, N.S., Souza, C.d.S., De Almeida, M.M.A., Bispo da Silva, A., Dos Santos, B.L., 
Silva, V.D.A., De Assis, A.M., da Silva, J.S., Souza, D.O., Costa, M.F.D., Butt, A.M., 
2020. Neuroimmunomodulatory and neuroprotective effects of the flavonoid 
apigenin in in vitro models of neuroinflammation associated with Alzheimer’s 
disease. Front. Aging Neurosci 12, 119. 
Egan, M.F., Kost, J., Tariot, P.N., Aisen, P.S., Cummings, J.L., Vellas, B., Sur, C., 
Mukai, Y., Voss, T., Furtek, C., Mahoney, E., Mozley, L.H., Vandenberghe, R., Mo, Y., 
Michelson, D., 2018. Randomized trial of verubecestat for mild-to-moderate 
Alzheimer’s disease. N. Engl. J. Med. 378 (18), 1691–1703. 
Estiri, H., Azhir, A., Blacker, D.L., Ritchie, C.S., Patel, C.J., Murphy, S.N., 2023. Temporal 
characterization of Alzheimer’s Disease with sequences of clinical records. 
Ebiomedicine 92, 104629. 
Falls, N., Singh, D., Anwar, F., Verma, A., Kumar, V., 2018. Amelioration of 
neurodegeneration and cognitive impairment by Lemon oil in experimental model of 
Stressed mice. Biomed. Pharmacother. 106, 575–583. 
Fan, L., Borenstein, A.R., Wang, S., Nho, K., Zhu, X., Wen, W., Huang, X., Mortimer, J.A., 
Shrubsole, M.J., Dai, Q., 2023. Associations of circulating saturated long-chain fatty 
acids with risk of mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer’s disease in the 
Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) cohort. Ebiomedicine 97, 
104818. 
Femminella, G.D., Ferrara, N., Rengo, G., 2015. The emerging role of microRNAs in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Physiol. 6, 40. 
Feng, C.Z., Cao, L., Luo, D., Ju, L.S., Yang, J.J., Xu, X.Y., Yu, Y.P., 2019. Dendrobium 
polysaccharides attenuate cognitive impairment in senescence-accelerated mouse 
prone 8 mice via modulation of microglial activation. Brain Res 1704, 1–10. 
Frenkel, D., Wilkinson, K., Zhao, L., Hickman, S.E., Means, T.K., Puckett, L., Farfara, D., 
Kingery, N.D., Weiner, H.L., El Khoury, J., 2013. Scara1 deficiency impairs clearance 
of soluble amyloid-β by mononuclear phagocytes and accelerates Alzheimer’s-like 
disease progression. Nat. Commun. 4 (1), 1–9. 
Frisoni, G.B., Altomare, D., Thal, D.R., Ribaldi, F., van der Kant, R., Ossenkoppele, R., 
Blennow, K., Cummings, J., van Duijn, C., Nilsson, P.M., Dietrich, P.Y., Scheltens, P., 
Dubois, B., 2022. The probabilistic model of Alzheimer disease: the amyloid 
hypothesis revised. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 23 (1), 53–66. 
Ganesan, K., Quiles, J.L., Daglia, M., Xiao, J., Xu, B., 2021. Dietary phytochemicals 
modulate intestinal epithelial barrier dysfunction and autoimmune diseases. Food 
Front 2 (3), 357–382. 
Genin, E., Hannequin, D., Wallon, D., Sleegers, K., Hiltunen, M., Combarros, O., 
Bullido, M.J., Engelborghs, S., De Deyn, P., Berr, C., Pasquier, F., Dubois, B., 
Tognoni, G., Fi´evet, N., Brouwers, N., Bettens, K., Arosio, B., Coto, E., Del Zompo, M., 
Mateo, I., Epelbaum, J., Frank-Garcia, A., Helisalmi, S., Porcellini, E., Pilotto, A., 
Forti, P., Ferri, R., Scarpini, E., Siciliano, G., Solfrizzi, V., Sorbi, S., Spalletta, G., 
Valdivieso, F., Veps¨al¨ainen, S., Alvarez, V., Bosco, P., Mancuso, M., Panza, F., 
Nacmias, B., Bossù, P., Hanon, O., Piccardi, P., Annoni, G., Seripa, D., Galimberti, D., 
Licastro, F., Soininen, H., Dartigues, J.F., Kamboh, M.I., Van Broeckhoven, C., 
Lambert, J.C., Amouyel, P., Campion, D., 2011. APOE and Alzheimer disease: a 
major gene with semi-dominant inheritance. Mol. Psychiatry 16 (9), 903–907. 
Gody´n, J., Jo´nczyk, J., Panek, D., Malawska, B., 2016. Therapeutic strategies for 
Alzheimer’s disease in clinical trials. Pharmacol. Rep. 68 (1), 127–138. 
Gromek, S.M., deMayo, J.A., Maxwell, A.T., West, A.M., Pavlik, C.M., Zhao, Z., Li, J., 
Wiemer, A.J., Zweifach, A., Balunas, M.J., 2016. Synthesis and biological evaluation 
of santacruzamate A analogues for anti-proliferative and immunomodulatory 
activity. Bioorg. Med. Chemi. 24 (21), 5183–5196. 
Gu, X.H., Xu, L.J., Liu, Z.Q., Wei, B., Yang, Y.J., Xu, G.G., Yin, X.P., Wang, W., 2016. The 
flavonoid baicalein rescues synaptic plasticity and memory deficits in a mouse model 
of Alzheimer’s disease. Behav. Brain Res. 311, 309–321. 
Guo, Z., Lou, Y., Kong, M., Luo, Q., Liu, Z., Wu, J., 2019. A systematic review of 
phytochemistry, pharmacology and pharmacokinetics on astragali radix: 
implications for astragali radix as a personalized medicine. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20 (6), 
1463. 
Haji, M., Kimura, N., Hanaoka, T., Aso, Y., Takemaru, M., Hirano, T., Matsubara, E., 
2015. Evaluation of regional cerebral blood flow in Alzheimer’s disease patients with 
subclinical hypothyroidism. Dement. Geriatr. Cogn. Disord. 39 (5–6), 360–367. 
Halder, S., Mehta, A.K., Kar, R., Mustafa, M., Mediratta, P.K., Sharma, K.K., 2011. Clove 
oil reverses learning and memory deficits in scopolamine-treated mice. Planta Med 
77 (08), 830–834. 
Hampel, H., Mesulam, M.M., Cuello, A.C., Farlow, M.R., Giacobini, E., Grossberg, G.T., 
Khachaturian, A.S., Vergallo, A., Cavedo, E., Snyder, P.J., Khachaturian, Z.S., 2018. 
The cholinergic system in the pathophysiology and treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Brain 141 (7), 1917–1933. 
H´ebert, S.S., Horr´e, K., Nicolaï, L., Bergmans, B., Papadopoulou, A.S., Delacourte, A., De 
Strooper, B., 2009. MicroRNA regulation of Alzheimer’s amyloid precursor protein 
expression. Neurobiol. Dis. 33 (3), 422–428. 
Huang, L.K., Chao, S.P., Hu, C.J., 2020. Clinical trials of new drugs for Alzheimer disease. 
J. Biomed. Sci. 27, 1–13. 
Huang, S., Mao, J., Ding, K., Zhou, Y., Zeng, X., Yang, W., Wang, P., Zhao, C., Yao, J., 
Xia, P., Pei, G., 2017. Polysaccharides from Ganoderma lucidum promote cognitive 
function and neural progenitor proliferation in mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Stem Cell Rep 8 (1), 84–94. 
Huang, Y., Chen, Y., Lu, S., Zhao, C., 2021. Recent advance of in vitro models in natural 
phytochemicals absorption and metabolism. eFood 2 (6), 307–318. 
Huang, Y., Shen, X.J., Zou, Q., Wang, S.P., Tang, S.M., Zhang, G.Z., 2011. Biological 
functions of microRNAs: a review. J. Physiol. Biochem. 67 (1), 129–139. 
Iyaswamy, A., Wang, X., Krishnamoorthi, S., Kaliamoorthy, V., Sreenivasmurthy, S.G., 
Kumar Durairajan, S.S., Song, J.X., Tong, B.C., Zhu, Z., Su, C.F., Liu, J., Cheung, K. 
H., Lu, J.H., Tan, J.Q., Li, H.W., Wong, M.S., Li, M., 2022. Theranostic F-SLOH 
mitigates Alzheimer’s disease pathology involving TFEB and ameliorates cognitive 
functions in Alzheimer’s disease models. Redox Biol 51, 102280. 
Jo, T., Kim, J., Bice, P., Huynh, K., Wang, T., Arnold, M., Meikle, P.J., Giles, C., 
Kaddurah-Daouk, R., Saykin, A.J., Nho, K., 2023. Circular-SWAT for deep learning 
based diagnostic classification of Alzheimer’s disease: application to metabolome 
data. EBioMedicine 97, 104820. 
Ju, Y., Tam, K.Y., 2022. Pathological mechanisms and therapeutic strategies for 
Alzheimer’s disease. Neural Regen. Res. 17 (3), 543–549. 
Kabir, M.T., Uddin, M., Begum, M., Thangapandiyan, S., Rahman, M., Aleya, L., 
Mathew, B., Ahmed, M., Barreto, G.E., Ashraf, G.M., 2019. Cholinesterase inhibitors 
for Alzheimer’s disease: multitargeting strategy based on anti-Alzheimer’s drugs 
repositioning. Curr. Pharm. Des. 25 (33), 3519–3535. 
Kalaria, R.N., Akinyemi, R., Ihara, M., 2012. Does vascular pathology contribute to 
Alzheimer changes? J. Neurol. Sci. 322 (1–2), 141–147. 
Karran, E., Mercken, M., Strooper, B.D., 2011. The amyloid cascade hypothesis for 
Alzheimer’s disease: an appraisal for the development of therapeutics. Nat. Rev. 
Drug Discov. 10 (9), 698–712. 
Katalini´c, M., Rusak, G., Barovi´c, J.D., ˇSinko, G., Jeli´c, D., Antolovi´c, R., Kovarik, Z., 
2010. Structural aspects of flavonoids as inhibitors of human butyrylcholinesterase. 
Eur. J. Med. Chem. 45 (1), 186–192. 
Khan, H., Ullah, H., Tundis, R., Belwal, T., Devkota, H.P., Daglia, M., Cetin, Z., Saygili, E. 
I., Campos, M.D.G., Capanoglu, E., Du, M., Dar, P., Xiao, J., 2020. Dietary flavonoids 
in the management of huntington’s disease: mechanism and clinical perspective. 
eFood 1 (1), 38–52. 
Kim, M., Jung, J., Jeong, N.Y., Chung, H.J., 2019. The natural plant flavonoid apigenin is 
a strong antioxidant that effectively delays peripheral neurodegenerative processes. 
Anat. Sci. Int. 94 (4), 285–294. 
Kivipelto, M., Mangialasche, F., Ngandu, T., 2018. Lifestyle interventions to prevent 
cognitive impairment, dementia and Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 14 (11), 
653–666. 
Kumar, A., Aggrawal, A., Pottabathini, R., Singh, A., 2016. Possible neuroprotective 
mechanisms of clove oil against icv-colchicine induced cognitive dysfunction. 
Pharmacol. Rep. 68 (4), 764–772. 
Kumar, A., Dogra, S., 2008. Neuropathology and therapeutic management of Alzheimer’s 
disease-An update. Drugs Future 33 (5), 433–446. 
Lanfranco, M.F., Ng, C.A., Rebeck, G.W., 2020. ApoE lipidation as a therapeutic target in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 21 (17), 6336. 
Lee, Y.B., Nagai, A., Kim, S.U., 2002. Cytokines, chemokines, and cytokine receptors in 
human microglia. J. Neurosci. Res. 69 (1), 94–103. 
Li, D., Li, Y.P., Li, Y.X., Zhu, X.H., Du, X.G., Zhou, M., Li, W.B., Deng, H.Y., 2018. Effect of 
regulatory network of exosomes and microRNAs on neurodegenerative diseases. 
Chin. Med. J. 131 (18), 2216–2225. 
Liang, Z., Currais, A., Soriano-Castell, D., Schubert, D., Maher, P., 2021. Natural products 
targeting mitochondria: emerging therapeutics for age-associated neurological 
disorders. Pharmacol. Ther. 221, 107749. 
Lin, X., Huang, Z., Chen, X., Rong, Y., Zhang, S., Jiao, Y., Huang, Q., Huang, R., 2014. 
Protective effect of Millettia pulchra polysaccharide on cognitive impairment induced 
by D-galactose in mice. Carbohydr. Polym. 101, 533–543. 
Liu, C.C., Liu, C.C., Kanekiyo, T., Xu, H., Bu, G., 2013. Apolipoprotein E and Alzheimer 
disease: risk, mechanisms and therapy. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 9 (2), 106–118. 
Liu, J.L., Fan, Y.G., Yang, Z.S., Wang, Z.Y., Guo, C., 2018. Iron and Alzheimer’s disease: 
from pathogenesis to therapeutic implications. Front. Neurosci. 12, 632. 
Liu, P.P., Xie, Y., Meng, X.Y., Kang, J.S., 2019a. History and progress of hypotheses and 
clinical trials for Alzheimer’s disease. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther 4 (1), 29. 
Liu, Q., Xi, Y., Wang, Q., Liu, J., Li, P., Meng, X., Liu, K., Chen, W., Liu, X., Liu, Z., 2021. 
Mannan oligosaccharide attenuates cognitive and behavioral disorders in the 5xFAD 
Alzheimer’s disease mouse model via regulating the gut microbiota-brain axis. Brain 
Behav. Immun. 95, 330–343. 
Liu, Y., Liu, W., Li, J., Tang, S., Wang, M., Huang, W., Yao, W., Gao, X., 2019b. 
A polysaccharide extracted from Astragalus membranaceus residue improves 
Q. Huang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

Phytomedicine 132 (2024) 155822
11
cognitive dysfunction by altering gut microbiota in diabetic mice. Carbohydr. Polym. 
205, 500–512. 
Liu, Y., Wang, J., Hsiung, G.Y.R., Song, W., 2020. Trehalose inhibits Aβ generation and 
plaque formation in Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurobiol. 57 (7), 3150–3157. 
Long, J.M., Holtzman, D.M., 2019. Alzheimer disease: an update on pathobiology and 
treatment strategies. Cell 179 (2), 312–339. 
Maes, O.C., Chertkow, H.M., Wang, E., Schipper, H.M., 2009. MicroRNA: implications for 
Alzheimer disease and other human CNS disorders. Curr. Genomics 10 (3), 154–168. 
Magalingam, K.B., Radhakrishnan, A., Ping, N.S., Haleagrahara, N., 2018. Current 
concepts of neurodegenerative mechanisms in Alzheimer’s disease. BioMed Res. Int. 
2018, 3740461. 
Misrani, A., Tabassum, S., Yang, L., 2021. Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress 
in Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Aging Neurosci 13, 617588. 
Najm, R., Jones, E.A., Huang, Y., 2019. Apolipoprotein E4, inhibitory network 
dysfunction, and Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener. 14 (1), 1–13. 
Nelson, P.T., Alafuzoff, I., Bigio, E.H., Bouras, C., Braak, H., Cairns, N.J., Castellani, R.J., 
Crain, B.J., Davies, P., Del Tredici, K., Duyckaerts, C., Frosch, M.P., Haroutunian, V., 
Hof, P.R., Hulette, C.M., Hyman, B.T., Iwatsubo, T., Jellinger, K.A., Jicha, G.A., 
K¨ovari, E., Kukull, W.A., Leverenz, J.B., Love, S., Mackenzie, I.R., Mann, D.M., 
Masliah, E., McKee, A.C., Montine, T.J., Morris, J.C., Schneider, J.A., Sonnen, J.A., 
Thal, D.R., Trojanowski, J.Q., Troncoso, J.C., Wisniewski, T., Woltjer, R.L., Beach, T. 
G., 2012. Correlation of Alzheimer disease neuropathologic changes with cognitive 
status: a review of the literature. J. Neuropathol. Exp. Neurol. 71 (5), 362–381. 
Nicolas, M., Hassan, B.A., 2014. Amyloid precursor protein and neural development. 
Development 141 (13), 2543–2548. 
Niego, A.G., Rapior, S., Thongklang, N., Rasp´e, O., Jaidee, W., Lumyong, S., Hyde, K.D., 
2021. Macrofungi as a nutraceutical source: promising bioactive compounds and 
market value. J. Fungi 7 (5), 397. 
Oboh, G., Busari, G.M., Ademosun, A.O., Oyeleye, S.I., 2022. Effect of dietary inclusion 
of Fireweed (Crassocephalum crepidioides) on behavioural patterns, memory indices, 
and activities of cholinergic and monoaminergic enzymes in a fruit fly (Drosophila 
melanogaster) model of Alzheimer’s disease. Food Front 3 (1), 206–217. 
Paiva, I.H.R., Duarte-Silva, E., Peixoto, C.A., 2020. The role of prebiotics in cognition, 
anxiety, and depression. Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 34, 1–18. 
Panda, S.S., Jhanji, N., 2020. Natural products as potential anti-Alzheimer agents. Curr. 
Med. Chem. 27 (35), 5887–5917. 
Pansari, K., Gupta, A., Thomas, P., 2002. Alzheimer’s disease and vascular factors: facts 
and theories. Int. J. Clin. Pract. 56 (3), 197–203. 
Panza, F., Lozupone, M., Logroscino, G., Imbimbo, B.P., 2019. A critical appraisal of 
amyloid-β-targeting therapies for Alzheimer disease. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 15 (2), 73–88. 
Park, S.K., Kang, J.Y., Kim, J.M., Yoo, S.K., Han, H.J., Chung, D.H., Kim, D.O., Kim, G.H., 
Heo, H.J., 2019. Fucoidan-rich substances from Ecklonia cava improve trimethyltin- 
induced cognitive dysfunction via down-regulation of amyloid β production/tau 
hyperphosphorylation. Mar. Drugs 17 (10), 591. 
Patel, A.A., Ganepola, G.A., Rutledge, J.R., Chang, D.H., 2019. The potential role of 
dysregulated miRNAs in Alzheimer’s disease pathogenesis and progression. 
J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 67 (4), 1123–1145. 
Perez Ortiz, J.M., Swerdlow, R.H., 2019. Mitochondrial dysfunction in Alzheimer’s 
disease: role in pathogenesis and novel therapeutic opportunities. Br. J. Pharmacol. 
176 (18), 3489–3507. 
Qi, G., Mi, Y., Fan, R., Li, R., Liu, Z., Liu, X., 2019. Nobiletin protects against systemic 
inflammation-stimulated memory impairment via MAPK and NF-κB signaling 
pathways. J. Agric. Food Chem. 67 (18), 5122–5134. 
Qi, Y., Duan, G., Fan, G., Peng, N., 2022. Effect of Lycium barbarum polysaccharides on 
cell signal transduction pathways. Biomed. Pharmacother. 147, 112620. 
Quan, M., Cao, S., Wang, Q., Wang, S., Jia, J., 2023. Genetic phenotypes of Alzheimer’s 
disease: mechanisms and potential therapy. Phenomics 3 (4), 333–349. 
Rad, S.K., Arya, A., Karimian, H., Madhavan, P., Rizwan, F., Koshy, S., Prabhu, G., 2018. 
Mechanism involved in insulin resistance via accumulation of β-amyloid and 
neurofibrillary tangles: link between type 2 diabetes and Alzheimer’s disease. Drug 
Des. Devel. Ther. 12, 3999. 
Rang, Y., Liu, H., Liu, C., 2022. Potential for non-starch polysaccharides in the 
prevention and remediation of cognitive impairment: a comprehensive review. Int. 
J. Biol. Macromol. 208, 182–195. 
Rempe, M.P., Wiesman, A.I., Murman, D.L., May, P.E., Christopher–Hayes, N.J., 
Wolfson, S.L., Johnson, C.M., Wilson, T.W., 2023. Sleep quality differentially 
modulates neural oscillations and proteinopathy in Alzheimer’s disease. 
EBioMedicine 92, 104610. 
Rezai-Zadeh, K., Arendash, G.W., Hou, H., Fernandez, F., Jensen, M., Runfeldt, M., 
Shytle, R.D., Tan, J., 2008. Green tea epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) reduces 
β-amyloid mediated cognitive impairment and modulates tau pathology in 
Alzheimer transgenic mice. Brain Res 1214, 177–187. 
Rezai-Zadeh, K., Shytle, D., Sun, N., Mori, T., Hou, H., Jeanniton, D., Ehrhart, J., 
Townsend, K., Zeng, J., Morgan, D., Hardy, J., Town, T., Tan, J., 2005. Green tea 
epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) modulates amyloid precursor protein cleavage 
and reduces cerebral amyloidosis in Alzheimer transgenic mice. J. Neurosci. 25 (38), 
8807–8814. 
Saresella, M., La Rosa, F., Piancone, F., Zoppis, M., Marventano, I., Calabrese, E., 
Rainone, V., Nemni, R., Mancuso, R., Clerici, M., 2016. The NLRP3 and NLRP1 
inflammasomes are activated in Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurodegener. 11, 1–14. 
Shal, B., Ding, W., Ali, H., Kim, Y.S., Khan, S., 2018. Anti-neuroinflammatory potential of 
natural products in attenuation of Alzheimer’s disease. Front. Pharmacol. 9, 548. 
Solis Jr, E., Hascup, K.N., Hascup, E.R., 2020. Alzheimer’s disease: the link between 
amyloid-β and neurovascular dysfunction. J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 76 (4), 1179–1198. 
Song, J., Cheon, S.Y., Jung, W., Lee, W.T., Lee, J.E., 2014. Resveratrol induces the 
expression of interleukin-10 and brain-derived neurotrophic factor in BV2 microglia 
under hypoxia. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 15 (9), 15512–15529. 
Strekalova, H., Buhmann, C., Kleene, R., Eggers, C., Saffell, J., Hemperly, J., Weiller, C., 
Müller-Thomsen, T., Schachner, M., 2006. Elevated levels of neural recognition 
molecule L1 in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with Alzheimer disease and other 
dementia syndromes. Neurobiol. Aging 27 (1), 1–9. 
Sturchio, A., Dwivedi, A.K., Malm, T., Wood, M.J., Cilia, R., Sharma, J.S., Hill, E.J., 
Schneider, L.S., Graff-Radford, N.R., Mori, H., Nübling, G., El Andaloussi, S., 
Svenningsson, P., Ezzat, K., Espay, A.J., 2022. High soluble amyloid-β 42 predicts 
normal cognition in amyloid-positive individuals with Alzheimer’s disease-causing 
mutations. J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 90 (1), 333–348. 
Su, A., Yang, W., Zhao, L., Pei, F., Yuan, B., Zhong, L., Ma, G., Hu, Q., 2018. Flammulina 
velutipes polysaccharides improve scopolamine-induced learning and memory 
impairment in mice by modulating gut microbiota composition. Food Funct 9 (3), 
1424–1432. 
Subaraja, M., Krishnan, D.A., Hillary, V.E., Raja, T.R.W., Mathew, P., RaviKumar, S., 
Gabriel Paulraj, M., Ignacimuthu, S., 2020. Fucoidan serves a neuroprotective effect 
in an Alzheimer’s disease model. Front. Biosci. 12 (1), 1–34. 
Sun, Y., Zeng, X., Liu, Y., Zhan, S., Wu, Z., Zheng, X., Zheng, X., 2022. Dendrobium 
officinale polysaccharide attenuates cognitive impairment in circadian rhythm 
disruption mice model by modulating gut microbiota. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 217, 
677–688. 
Sweeney, M.D., Montagne, A., Sagare, A.P., Nation, D.A., Schneider, L.S., Chui, H.C., 
Harrington, M.G., Pa, J., Law, M., Wang, D.J.J., Jacobs, R.E., Doubal, F.N., 
Ramirez, J., Black, S.E., Nedergaard, M., Benveniste, H., Dichgans, M., Iadecola, C., 
Love, S., Bath, P.M., Markus, H.S., Al-Shahi Salman, R., Allan, S.M., Quinn, T.J., 
Kalaria, R.N., Werring, D.J., Carare, R.O., Touyz, R.M., Williams, S.C.R., 
Moskowitz, M.A., Katusic, Z.S., Lutz, S.E., Lazarov, O., Minshall, R.D., Rehman, J., 
Davis, T.P., Wellington, C.L., Gonz´alez, H.M., Yuan, C., Lockhart, S.N., Hughes, T.M., 
Chen, C.L.H., Sachdev, P., O’Brien, J.T., Skoog, I., Pantoni, L., Gustafson, D.R., 
Biessels, G.J., Wallin, A., Smith, E.E., Mok, V., Wong, A., Passmore, P., Barkof, F., 
Muller, M., Breteler, M.M.B., Rom´an, G.C., Hamel, E., Seshadri, S., Gottesman, R.F., 
van Buchem, M.A., Arvanitakis, Z., Schneider, J.A., Drewes, L.R., Hachinski, V., 
Finch, C.E., Toga, A.W., Wardlaw, J.M., Zlokovic, B.V., 2019. Vascular dysfunction- 
the disregarded partner of Alzheimer’s disease. Alzheimer’s Dement 15 (1), 
158–167. 
Tan, C.C., Yu, J.T., Wang, H.F., Tan, M.S., Meng, X.F., Wang, C., Jiang, T., Zhu, X.C., 
Tan, L., 2014. Efficacy and safety of donepezil, galantamine, rivastigmine, and 
memantine for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review and meta- 
analysis. J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 41 (2), 615–631. 
Tan, M.S., Yu, J.T., Jiang, T., Zhu, X.C., Tan, L., 2013. The NLRP3 inflammasome in 
Alzheimer’s disease. Mol. Neurobiol. 48, 875–882. 
Tang, M., Taghibiglou, C., 2017. The mechanisms of action of curcumin in Alzheimer’s 
disease. J. Alzheimer’s Dis. 58 (4), 1003–1016. 
Tundis, R., Loizzo, M.R., Nabavi, S.M., Orhan, I.E., Skalicka-Wo´zniak, K., D’Onofrio, G., 
Aiello, F., 2018. Natural compounds and their derivatives as multifunctional agents 
for the treatment of Alzheimer disease. Discov. Dev. Neuroprot. Agents Nat. Prod. 
63–102. 
Van Acker, Z.P., Perdok, A., Bretou, M., Annaert, W., 2021. The microglial lysosomal 
system in Alzheimer’s disease: guardian against proteinopathy. Ageing Res. Rev. 71, 
101444. 
Veer, B., Singh, R., 2020. Natural products as anti-Alzheimer’s drugs. Stud. Nat. Prod. 
Chem. 66, 157–174. 
Venigalla, M., Gyengesi, E., Münch, G., 2015. Curcumin and Apigenin–novel and 
promising therapeutics against chronic neuroinflammation in Alzheimer’s disease. 
Neural Regener. Res. 10 (8), 1181–1185. 
Verma, S., Kumar, A., Tripathi, T., Kumar, A., 2018. Muscarinic and nicotinic 
acetylcholine receptor agonists: current scenario in Alzheimer’s disease therapy. 
J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 70 (8), 985–993. 
Voulgaropoulou, S., Van Amelsvoort, T., Prickaerts, J., Vingerhoets, C., 2019. The effect 
of curcumin on cognition in Alzheimer’s disease and healthy aging: a systematic 
review of pre-clinical and clinical studies. Brain Res 1725, 146476. 
Wang, J., Liu, P., Huang, X., Wu, X., 2021a. Validation of the protective effects of 
Lonicera japonica polysaccharide on lipopolysaccharide-induced learning and 
memory impairments via regulation of autophagy based on network pharmacology. 
Ann. Palliat. Med. 10 (2), 1089–1100. 
Wang, M., Chen, L., Zhang, Z., 2021b. Potential applications of alginate oligosaccharides 
for biomedicine-A mini review. Carbohydr. Polym. 271, 118408. 
Wang, M., Gong, C., Amakye, W.K., Ren, J., 2021c. Exploring the mechanisms of anti- 
Aβ42 aggregation activity of walnut-derived peptides using transcriptomics and 
proteomics in vitro. eFood 2 (5), 247–258. 
Wang, P., Sun, H., Liu, D., Jiao, Z., Yue, S., He, X., Xia, W., Ji, J., Xiang, L., 2017. 
Protective effect of a phenolic extract containing indoline amides from Portulaca 
oleracea against cognitive impairment in senescent mice induced by large dose of D- 
galactose/NaNO2. J. Ethnopharmacol. 203, 252–259. 
Ward, R.J., Zucca, F.A., Duyn, J.H., Crichton, R.R., Zecca, L., 2014. The role of iron in 
brain ageing and neurodegenerative disorders. Lancet Neurol 13 (10), 1045–1060. 
Wolfe, C.M., Fitz, N.F., Nam, K.N., Lefterov, I., Koldamova, R., 2018. The role of APOE 
and TREM2 in Alzheimer’s disease-current understanding and perspectives. Int. J. 
Mol. Sci. 20 (1), 81. 
Xin, Y., Diling, C., Jian, Y., Ting, L., Guoyan, H., Hualun, L., Xiaocui, T., Guoxiao, L., 
Ou, S., Chaoqun, Z., Jun, Z., Yizhen, X., 2018. Effects of oligosaccharides from 
Morinda officinalis on gut microbiota and metabolome of APP/PS1 transgenic mice. 
Front. Neurol. 9, 412. 
Q. Huang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

Phytomedicine 132 (2024) 155822
12
Xu, T., Shen, X., Yu, H., Sun, L., Lin, W., Zhang, C., 2016. Water-soluble ginseng 
oligosaccharides protect against scopolamine-induced cognitive impairment by 
functioning as an antineuroinflammatory agent. J. Ginseng Res. 40 (3), 211–219. 
Yamazaki, Y., Zhao, N., Caulfield, T.R., Liu, C.C., Bu, G., 2019. Apolipoprotein E and 
Alzheimer disease: pathobiology and targeting strategies. Nat. Rev. Neurol. 15 (9), 
501–518. 
Yan, T., Nian, T., Wu, B., Xiao, F., He, B., Bi, K., Jia, Y., 2020. Okra polysaccharides can 
reverse the metabolic disorder induced by high-fat diet and cognitive function injury 
in Aβ1-42 mice. Exp. Gerontol. 130, 110802. 
Yang, W., Yu, J., Zhao, L., Ma, N., Fang, Y., Pei, F., Mariga, A.M., Hu, Q., 2015. 
Polysaccharides from Flammulina velutipes improve scopolamine-induced 
impairment of learning and memory of rats. J. Funct. Foods 18, 411–422. 
Yu, H.J., Dickson, S.P., Wang, P.N., Chiu, M.J., Huang, C.C., Chang, C.C., Liu, H., 
Hendrix, S.B., Dodart, J., Verma, A., Wang, C.Y., Cummings, J., 2023. Safety, 
tolerability, immunogenicity, and efficacy of UB-311 in participants with mild 
Alzheimer’s disease: a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 2a 
study. EBioMedicine 94, 104665. 
Yu, Y., Ye, R.D., 2015. Microglial Aβ receptors in Alzheimer’s disease. Cell. Mol. 
Neurobiol. 35 (1), 71–83. 
Zeineh, M.M., Chen, Y., Kitzler, H.H., Hammond, R., Vogel, H., Rutt, B.K., 2015. 
Activated iron-containing microglia in the human hippocampus identified by 
magnetic resonance imaging in Alzheimer disease. Neurobiol. Aging 36 (9), 
2483–2500. 
Zeng, X., Wang, X., Zhao, H., Xi, Y., Cao, J., Jiang, W., 2018. Protective effects of banana 
pectin against aluminum-induced cognitive impairment and aluminum 
accumulation in mice. Drug Chem. Toxicol. 41 (3), 294–301. 
Zhang, S.Q., Obregon, D., Ehrhart, J., Deng, J., Tian, J., Hou, H., Giunta, B., 
Sawmiller, D., Tan, J., 2013. Baicalein reduces β-amyloid and promotes 
nonamyloidogenic amyloid precursor protein processing in an Alzheimer’s disease 
transgenic mouse model. J. Neurosci. Res. 91 (9), 1239–1246. 
Zhang, Y., Li, H., Yang, X., Jin, G., Zhang, Y., 2018. Cognitive-enhancing effect of 
polysaccharides from Flammulina velutipes on Alzheimer’s disease by compatibilizing 
with ginsenosides. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 112, 788–795. 
Zhang, Y., Lu, J., Wang, M., Zuo, C., Jiang, J., 2023. Influence of gender on tau 
precipitation in Alzheimer’s disease according to ATN research framework. 
Phenomics 3 (6), 565–575. 
Zhang, Y., Yang, X., Jin, G., Yang, X., Zhang, Y., 2016. Polysaccharides from Pleurotus 
ostreatus alleviate cognitive impairment in a rat model of Alzheimer’s disease. Int. J. 
Biol. Macromol. 92, 935–941. 
Zhang, Z., Wang, S., Tan, H., Yang, P., Li, Y., Xu, L., Duan, B., Liu, Y., 2022. Advances in 
polysaccharides of natural source of the anti-Alzheimer’s disease effect and 
mechanism. Carbohydr. Polym. 296, 119961. 
Zhao, C., Lai, S., Wu, D., Liu, D., Zou, X., Ismail, A., El-Seedi, H., Arroo, R.R.J., Xiao, J., 
2020a. miRNAs as regulators of antidiabetic effects of fucoidans. eFood 1 (1), 2–11. 
Zhao, C., Wan, X., Zhou, S., Cao, H., 2020b. Natural polyphenols: a potential therapeutic 
approach to hypoglycemia. eFood 1 (2), 107–118. 
Zhao, L., Wang, J.L., Liu, R., Li, X.X., Li, J.F., Zhang, L., 2013. Neuroprotective, anti- 
amyloidogenic and neurotrophic effects of apigenin in an Alzheimer’s disease mouse 
model. Molecules 18 (8), 9949–9965. 
Zhao, P., Zhou, R., Zhu, X.Y., Liu, G., Zhao, Y.P., Ma, P.S., Wu, W., Niu, Y., Sun, T., Li, Y. 
X., Yu, J.Q., Qian, Z.M, 2017. Neuroprotective effects of Lycium barbarum 
polysaccharide on focal cerebral ischemic injury in mice. Neurochem. Res. 42 (10), 
2798–2813. 
Zhou, L., Tan, S., Shan, Y.L., Wang, Y.G., Cai, W., Huang, X.H., Liao, X.Y., Li, H.Y., 
Zhang, L., Zhang, B.J., Lu, Z.Q., 2016. Baicalein improves behavioral dysfunction 
induced by Alzheimer’s disease in rats. Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat. 12, 3145–3152. 
Zhou, Y., Duan, Y., Huang, S., Zhou, X., Zhou, L., Hu, T., Yang, Y., Lu, J., Ding, K., 
Guo, D., Cao, X., Pei, G., 2020. Polysaccharides from Lycium barbarum ameliorate 
amyloid pathology and cognitive functions in APP/PS1 transgenic mice. Int. J. Biol. 
Macromol. 144, 1004–1012. 
Zou, Y., Fan, F., Fang, Y., Li, P., Xia, J., Shen, X., Liu, Q., Hu, Q., 2021. Neuroprotective 
effect of alkylresorcinols from wheat bran in HT22 cells: correlation with in vitro 
antioxidant activity. eFood 2 (1), 13–20. 
Q. Huang et al.