www.afm-journal.de
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2104480  (1 of 21)
Review
Photoactive Lanthanide-Based Upconverting Nanoclusters 
for Antimicrobial Applications
Noufal Kandoth,* Subhadip Barman, Atin Chatterjee, Sandip Sarkar, Anik Kumar Dey, 
Sumit Kumar Pramanik,* and Amitava Das*
Developing photoactive nanosystems against microbial infection and its 
therapeutic application is compromised by the lack of suitable materials 
or molecular dyes activatable at biofriendly NIR light. In this direction, the 
upconverting nanoparticles based on core–shell lanthanide-doped nano-
clusters are developed synthetically to achieve a broad range of NIR-active 
phototherapeutic antimicrobial agents. This review illustrates antimicrobial 
photodynamic therapy (aPDT) and multimodal therapy by NIR photoirradia-
tion, generated by lanthanum doped upconverting nanoparticles (UCNPs). 
The objective herein is to discuss the insights in developing the UCNPs for 
designing efficient aPDTs and their efficacies against emerging antibiotic-
resistant bacterial colonies and their biofilms, drug-resistant fungi, and 
viruses. The biosafety and biocompatibility of UCNPs at both in vitro and in 
vivo level are also presented in detail. Finally, our perspectives on the ways of 
future material engineering needed for the effective translation into their real-
world applications are also commented.
DOI: 10.1002/adfm.202104480
N. Kandoth, S. Barman, A. Chatterjee, S. Sarkar, A. Das
Department of Chemical Sciences
Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Kolkata
Campus Road, Mohanpur, West Bengal 741246, India
E-mail: nf3938@iiserkol.ac.in; amitava@iiserkol.ac.in
A. K. Dey, S. K. Pramanik
Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute
Gijubhai Badheka Marg, Bhavnagar, Gujarat 364002, India
E-mail: sumitpramanik@csmcri.res.in
10 million per year by 2050, accounting for 
the mortality rate higher than both AIDS 
and cancer combined.[5] Indeed, the 
experts say we are on the verge of a post-
antibiotic apocalypse.[6] Different types of 
bacteria, that is, both Gram-positive and 
Gram-negative bacteria develop antimicro-
bial drug resistance (AMR) by modifying 
the antibiotic target of synthetic drug mole-
cules (Figure  1A,B). The causes of AMR 
are complex. For developing countries, 
these are linked to inadequate health care 
management, patient education, limited 
diagnostic facilities, excessive use of the 
non-regulatory framework.[7] Some of these 
are also prevalent in developed countries 
too. Importantly, research for newer mole-
cular antibiotic analogues has lost impetus 
in recent years due to the lack of economic 
incentives for synthetic antibiotic research. 
Current commercially available antibiotics 
address only a limited number of essential bacterial target path-
ways. These narrow-spectrum antibiotics have triggered bacte-
rial resistance, in which bacterial colonies can easily modify drug 
binding sites genetically via the production of enactive enzymes, 
overexpression of efflux pumps, and developing thick extracel-
lular polymeric substances limiting the intracellular penetra-
tion of antibiotics (Figure 1A,B).[8] Finally, these drug-resistant 
bacterial colonies proliferate enough to form biofilms, which 
are virtually insensitive to antibiotics.[4] Surprisingly, only a few 
novel classes of antibiotics were introduced in the last 20 years 
despite the rampant emergence of multi-resistant bacterial 
strains in the last decades.[9]
Like bacterial infections, fungal infections account for ≈60% 
mortality rate in hospitalized patients and kill around 2 mil-
lion people annually.[10] This is partly due to the limited access 
to the appropriate antifungal drugs and the rapid emergence of 
drug resistance. On top of all this, emergent viruses like novel 
coronavirus 2 (nCoV-2) made the world stand still, and accounted 
for the leading cause of morbidity and mortality accompanied 
by the devastating worldwide socio-economic impacts.[11] The 
antiviral treatment mainly relies on the vaccination and thera-
peutic targeting of critical viral life cycles in the host cells.[3,11,12] 
However, many viruses bypass this therapeutic route by geneti-
cally modifying their antigenic ligands and often evolve into drug-
resistant strains. Common human viruses are nanometric size 
(<500 nm) and target the cells through multivariate interactions 
like receptor-bound endocytosis or cell membrane fusion. Here, 
The ORCID identification number(s) for the author(s) of this article 
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202104480.
1. Introduction
Microbial infections are posing new challenges to human well-
being and health. Research in the area of improved drug delivery 
for better drug efficacy has got new impetus, especially during 
the SARS-CoV-2 infection.[1–3] The challenge in the conventional 
treatments for microbial infections is amplified by the microbial 
resistance to traditional antibiotics, and most pathogenic bac-
teria responsible for chronic infections typically exist in the bio-
film form.[4] This demands special attention toward the effective 
disease management protocol, as well as the new drug delivery 
methods for treating emerging microbial infections. In bacte-
rial infections, antibiotic drug-resistant bacteria cause around 
1 million death annually, and this number appears to exceed 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2104480  (2 of 21)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
developing a therapeutic agent with multiple binding sites could, 
in principle, mimic viral actions with strong binding affinity to 
the biomolecules, ligands, cell surface receptors prior to viral 
attachment to the host cells and also degrade the viral particles. 
Indeed, in the past decade, a wide variety of broad-spectrum anti-
viral drugs less prone to resistance has been reported, and they 
can be potentially repurposed for the newly emerging virus.[13]
1.1. Antimicrobial Nanosystems
With the advent of nanoscience and nanotechnology for diverse 
biomedical applications, stimuli-responsive nanosystems as 
antimicrobial agent have received a surge in interest in the 
last decades as a potential alternative to conventional synthetic 
antimicrobial drugs.[14,15] The physicochemical features of nano-
materials like their size, shape, and surface properties can be 
readily tuned to achieve desired antimicrobial features with the 
ability to circumvent the resistance mechanism of the microbes 
or their biofilms. Further, the novel approaches in antimicrobial 
therapy like: i) conjugating with the receptor binding ligands; ii) 
targeting extracellular membrane proteins leads to the chemical 
damage of entire pathogen; iii) membrane permeation by ligated 
membrane transporters into the intracellular organelles and fur-
ther to bind therein with DNA, ribosomes, and enzymes, finally 
disrupting cellular activities and inducing its damage.[14] Specifi-
cally, in the case of viral therapy, the drug delivery nanosystems 
can offer several possibilities with regards to the limitation of 
current antiviral therapy. The nanocarrier significantly improves 
the poor aqueous solubility and low bioavailability of viral drug, 
enhancing the targeting efficiency, reducing potential adverse 
side effects by regulating the essential pharmacokinetics/phar-
macodynamics.[3] For instance, a promising drug against SARS-
CoV-2, ebselen, is highly lipophilic and poorly soluble in water 
and potentially toxic, whereas linking it with nanosystems 
improved its bioavailability.[16] Further, a viral drug remdesivir, 
which is approved by FDA for the SARS-CoV-2 treatment, has 
shown its improved effectiveness while linked with nanocar-
riers in the treatment of Nipah virus infections.[11] Another, issue 
with antiviral drugs like its subtherapeutic concentration at the 
reserved site, nonselective delivery can also be overcome by 
using a ligand conjugated active targeting nanosystems, which 
can cross the biological barriers and deliver optimum drug dose 
in a sheltered viral reservoir.[3] Apart from viral drug delivery, the 
nanomaterials can also be assembled with a variety of synthetic 
antigen analogues by either covalent or noncovalent means and 
their delivery into infectious disease site can elicit the immu-
nogenic response of body immunity toward possible vaccina-
tions.[12] Finally, the advanced knowledge and maturity obtained 
in the development of antitumor drug delivery nanosystems, 
could be also translated for emerging microbial infections.
1.2. Antimicrobial PDT Based on Lanthanide UCNPs
The treatment modalities with nanosystems can be prompted 
with various kinds of internal cellular stimuli like pH alterations, 
redox changes, enzymatic actions, and external stimuli like heat, 
light photons, ultrasound waves, mechanical stimuli, and other 
radiations triggers.[17] Here the photo-triggered nanosystems 
Figure 1.  The mechanism of antibiotic resistance generally implemented by bacteria and the upconverting nanosystem induced aPDT in Gram-negative 
and Gram-positive bacteria. A) Various ways of antibiotic resistance enabled by bacteria to inactivate the dosage of general antibiotics. B) General 
scheme showing the microbial biofilm formation and its dispersion to planktonic analogues. C) Inactivation of microbial cell organelles with photo-
active upconverting nanoparticles and its PDT actions in Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria, and their consequent phototherapeutic actions 
leading to the mortality.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480
 16163028, 2021, 43, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202104480 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2104480  (3 of 21)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
have a distinct edge over other methodologies owing to their 
easy availability, benign and non-invasive nature, and they can 
be easily manipulated with exact control over the dosage, space, 
and time.[18,19] Indeed, light stimulated therapy was known his-
torically as a microbicidal agent and its recent advancement in 
antitumor therapy could, in principle, be translated for microbi-
cidal actions. The photodynamic therapy (PDT), means a suit-
able light, photosensitizer (PS), and molecular oxygen reacts 
together in the PS excited state to yield reactive oxygen or 
nitrogen species (ROS/RNS) as photo-cytotoxic agents, has been 
applied extensively in this regard in biomedical applications, 
and some of them are also in clinical practices.[20–22] PDT offers 
a minimally invasive therapeutic mode and considered as an 
appealing strategy over classical antimicrobial therapy by syn-
thetic antibiotics. Recently, antimicrobial effects of PDT, coined 
as antimicrobial PDT (aPDT), become popular due to the wide-
spread antibiotic resistance and it is suggested as an effective 
treatment modality for local microbial infections.[23,24] In the 
case of photoactive nanosystems including UCNPs, induction 
of multifold bacterial damage occurs via a chain propagating 
radical mechanistic pathway leading to nucleoid and plasmid 
DNA damage, protein and ribosome denaturations, enzyme 
inactivations (Figure 1C).[11,25–28]
The photochemical processes associated with PDT starts with 
the photoexcitation of the PS with a light of a suitable wave-
length, resulting in the formation of excited singlet states of 
PS (Sn to S1) followed by the relaxation either into the ground 
state (fluorescence) or into its metastable triplet states via spin 
inversion (Tn to T1, intersystem crossing-ISC, Figure  2A).[29] 
Since relaxation of the triplet excited state into the singlet state 
is spin forbidden in the case of PS, its triplet excited state is 
long-lived for the effective collisional encounter with nearby 
Figure 2.  Principle of aPDT and general energy relaxation pathway operates in molecular PS’s and UCNPs. A) General representation of Jablonsky 
diagram showing the energy transition of molecular PS and its induction of aPDT in microbes via electron and energy transfer mediated ROS pathway. 
B) A general scheme of energy transition upconversion occurs in upconverting nanoparticles upon multiple photon excitation where prototypical 
NaYF4:Yb/Er/Tm nanoparticles are shown as an example.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480
 16163028, 2021, 43, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202104480 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2104480  (4 of 21)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
oxygen or substrates. Following this, two scenarios may emerge. 
The PS in a triplet (T1) state can undergo electron transfer reac-
tion with the nearby substrate, resulting the radical intermedi-
ates (Type I mechanism). The second possibility is the energy 
transfer from the excited triplet state of the PS toward nearby, 
triplet state, molecular oxygen (type II mechanism). Following 
this deactivation pathway, PS returns to its ground state via the 
formation of a short-lived singlet oxygen species (1O2). This 
cycle repeats with another incoming photon to generate a good 
yield of cytotoxic 1O2 or other radical ROS, and forms the basis 
of aPDT (Figure 2A). However, the problem of using aPDT lies 
in the selection of suitable light to activate common PS’s. Pri-
marily, the molecular PS’s are active in the high energy UV/vis 
region, which has limited tissue penetration.[30] However, the 
lower energy light in the NIR region (750–2000 nm) penetrate 
deep into the tissues due to low scattering and less background 
absorption of cellular components in the tissues. Alternatively, 
other phototherapy applications like photothermal therapy (PTT) 
are also in practice in antimicrobial therapy. The PTT is based on 
the light to thermal energy conversion where the light is utilized 
to excite suitable nanomaterials to generate the localized heating 
of bio-sites and leading to tissue damage by the denaturation 
of nucleic acids or proteins and also by cell membrane disrup-
tion.[31] However, the mere usage of PTT demands the excessive 
temperature needed for the irreversible microbial damage and 
the severe heating may cause damage to the nearby healthy tis-
sues. General molecular PS’s are not so sensitive to NIR light 
and using PDT or PTT alone would not suffice optimum micro-
bicidal actions to the emerging infections. A promising alterna-
tive is to utilize nonlinear photophysical mechanisms, like two-
photon absorption or upconversion phenomenon. An attractive 
feature of the photon upconversion from the luminescent nano-
systems is that the emission of higher energy photon in UV/vis 
region after the excitation with two or more low-energy photon in 
NIR region via an anti-Stoke emission process.[30,32] Considering 
the upconverting nanosystems, three groups of upconversion 
types are prevalent, in general, as lanthanide ion-doped inorganic 
nanomaterials,[32,33] d-block transition metal-based and organic 
dyes-based triplet-triplet annihilation (TTA) upconversion.[34,35]
Among this, the lanthanide (Ln3+) doped luminescent mate-
rials have superseded the other similar inorganic materials 
due to their outstanding photophysical features like excellent 
photostability and non-photoblinking nature, sharp absorption 
and emission bandwidth, large anti-Stoke shift,[36,37] and long 
excited-state lifetime (Figure  2B). Their fervent biological fea-
tures are like less toxicity, the possibility of using excitation with 
deep tissue penetrating NIR light, applications in fluorescence 
imaging with negligible interference from background scattering 
and autofluorescence. Consequently, various research disciplines 
have exploited this together with the generation of cytotoxic ROS 
for PDT, PTT, and optogenetics,[38–42] Such UCNPs with NIR 
activation have also been used to activate the photosensitive ion 
channel and manipulate the cation influx in living cell.[43–45] In 
this regard, the focus of the review is to showcase the advance-
ment of Ln3+ ion-doped upconverting nanoparticles (UCNPs) 
for antimicrobial applications such as antibacterial, antifungal, 
and antiviral theranostics. Indeed, the detailed research on the 
photon upconversion process of lanthanide ion-doped UCNPs 
in phototheranostics, their synthetic strategies, and their photo-
physical and photochemical features are already reviewed com-
prehensively elsewhere.[37,46–48] Also expert readers in the field 
outside aPDT are directed to read excellent reviews to get the 
detailed knowledge on the fundamental principles of UCNPs 
applied for antibacterial phototherapy.[28,49–52] This review pre-
sents rather unique antimicrobial theranostics using UCNPs 
and its multifunctional hybrid systems. The attempt herein is 
to spur research interest among phototheranostics community 
to carry out serious research in the multimodal antimicrobial 
therapy of bacteria, biofilms, fungi, and virus with the aid of NIR 
light-activated nanosystems. Before going into this in detail, we 
will briefly revisit the essential features of UCNPs required for 
aPDT and other multimodal antimicrobial therapy.
1.3. Ln3+ Doped UCNPs: General Upconversion Photo-
physics, Development of Multimodal Nanosystem via Surface 
Modifications
Trivalent lanthanide (Ln3+) ion possesses upconversion lumi-
nescence (UCL) features due to the presence of partially 
occupied 4f-orbitals and filled 5s and 5p orbitals,[46] where 
multiband electronic transitions can easily occur through them 
(Figure 2B).[53] The electronic transitions between these closely 
spaced orbitals can result in spin-forbidden sharp lumines-
cence bands and long-lasting excited states (≈µs–ms order).[30,46] 
The UCNP’s are developed by doping lanthanide ions in inor-
ganic host crystalline lattice (Yb3+, Er3+, Tm3+, Ho3+, Gd3+, and 
others). The general host lattice materials used for the UCNPs 
synthesis are NaYF4, NaGdF4, and NaLuF4 as they allow easy 
incorporation of Ln3+ dopant in their host lattice. Importantly, 
such host lattices show low lattice vibrations, and are fairly 
transparent to the exciting NIR photons.
Among various upconversion host materials, fluorides are best 
suited as the host candidates for UCL, as these possess very low 
phonon energies and high chemical stability.[54] Halides such as 
iodides, bromides, and chlorides contain low phonon frequencies 
(≤300 cm−1) but are hygroscopic and have limited use. The oxides, 
host matrices have relatively large phonon frequencies (larger 
than 500 cm−1) and good chemical stability. In comparison to 
other host matrices, fluorides have a quite low phonon frequency 
(between 300 and 500 cm−1). Low phonon frequencies minimize 
the loss due to non-radiative relaxation pathways. Furthermore, 
Yb3+/Er3+ and Yb3+/Tm3+ doped NaYF4 are known to be the 
most efficient in giving green and blue emissions. Also, the hex-
agonal phase of these host materials enhances the upconversion 
quantum yield in comparison with other phases.[55] Generally, 
UCNPs is made of three basic components: i) an inorganic host 
material; ii) an Ln3+-based sensitizer; and iii) an activator doped 
in the host matrix. The sensitizer and activator ions are doped 
at a close distance with appropriate alignment in their excited 
electronic states.[30] The upconversion luminescence arises from 
energy transfer events occurring between the rich energy levels 
of these doped Ln3+ ions through different mechanisms like: 
1) excited-state absorption (ESA); 2) energy transfer upconver-
sion (ETU); 3) cooperative sensitization upconversion (CSU); 
4) photon avalanche (PA); 5) energy migration upconversion 
(EMU); mainly among them (Figure  3).[56,57] The ESA occurs 
through the absorption of two or more photons sequentially by a 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480
 16163028, 2021, 43, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202104480 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2104480  (5 of 21)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
single excited ion having the intermediate energy level, which is 
then promoted a higher energy excited state.[30]
The ETU mechanism operates similar to ESA but the energy 
transfer process occurs through a minimum of two Ln3+ ions 
at closed space, where one acts as sensitizer and the other as 
activator ion (Figure 3). First, the NIR photon excitation of the 
sensitizer ion results in its metastable excited states E1, from 
which the energy transfer occurs to the activator E1 state fol-
lowed by the ground state relaxation. However, the second sen-
sitizer photoexcitation results additional energy transfer to the 
activator ion and populating its emissive E2 state, which then 
relaxes to the ground state as a high energy photon. In this way, 
multiple energy transfer process occurs between the dopant 
and activator ion, and one of the requirements for an effective 
ETU process is that both ions should be in close proximity, 
which could be further tuned by the overall concentration of the 
dopants.[30,57] The cooperative sensitization upconversion works 
between three ion centers where two same sensitizers (ion 1, 3) 
get excited and transfer the excitation energy to the second acti-
vator ion and finally resulting in upconverted luminescence 
from the ion 2. At higher excitation power, the UCL mechanism 
occurs through the photon avalanche mechanism, where two 
ions are involved in the cross-relaxation of excited energy to 
result in an energy looping process between them. Finally, the 
energy migration upconversion process occurs in core–shell 
UCNPs systems, where multiple ions located between core and 
shell are involved in the multiple energy transfer process occur-
ring between sensitizer excitation (ion 1), accumulator (ion 2), 
migrator (ion 3), and activator (ion 4).[57–60]
Commonly used sensitizer ion dopant for UCNPs are Yb3+ 
and Nd3+, which are activated at 980 and 808 nm, respectively, 
and they possess a higher absorption coefficient at these wave-
lengths than any other lanthanide ion dopants.[57] However, 
980 nm excitation causes the undesired heating effect of the 
tissues as the water can absorb in this wavelength to form 
its vibrational excitation and the present research emphasis 
on UCNPs is centered around Nd3+ doped analogues, poten-
tially opening the possibility of photoexcitation around 
800 nm having least absorption cross-section for water.[61–64] 
Nevertheless, the efficiency of the energy transfer process falls 
off drastically as the distance between sensitizer and activator 
ion increases. Thus, reducing nanometric size also influence 
the UCL efficiency significantly. As the ratio of the surface 
area to the volume increases at the nanometric size, the UCL 
can be deactivated by the surface quenching between nearby 
dopant ions.[57] Further UCL deactivation include the fac-
tors like surface impurities, coated ligands, and solvents. To 
avoid this, UCNPs are made as a core–shell structure where 
the shell is formed by host materials and the core by doped 
host materials. Additionally, the shell is coated with lipo-
philic surfactants (e.g., oleic acid, oleylamine, 1-octadecence, 
octadecylamine) as ligands to control the morphology during 
the synthesis.[30] However, these hydrophobic ligands render 
UCNPs water insoluble and hamper its biological applica-
tions.[30] Nevertheless, they can be coated with mesoporous 
silica which enhances aqueous solubility and suitable for 
entrapping a high load of antimicrobial drugs or general 
hydrophobic PS’s.[46] The entrapment generally occurs through 
Figure 3.  A simplified representation of the mechanism of multiple energy transfer occurs in UCNPs resulting UCL emission. The transition of energy 
states during A) excited state absorption upconversion (ESA), and B) energy transfer upconversion (ETU), C) cooperative sensitization upconversion 
(CSU), D) photon avalanche (PA), E) energy migration upconversion (EMU).
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480
 16163028, 2021, 43, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202104480 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2104480  (6 of 21)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
the electrovalent interactions between the silica and drug 
molecules. Generally, various surface ligation methods have 
been implemented for UCNPs like, inorganic surface silaniza-
tion reactions, ligand exchange or ligand removal, coating with 
polymer or other biocompatible macromolecules, and ligand 
oxidations (Figure  4).[57,47] The conjugation of UCNPs with 
silica crosslinking avoids the burst release of entrapped drugs, 
which results the high threshold of antimicrobial drugs to the 
infectious site, and enhancement of the overall chemical sta-
bility. Alternatively, the UCNPs can be made water soluble for 
biological application by removing the surface capped hydro-
phobic ligands and treating with acids or alcohol solutions, and 
capping additionally with hydrophilic ligand groups (COOH, 
NH2, SH).[65] This can be also achieved by the selective oxi-
dation of capped unsaturated lipophilic ligands with suitable 
oxidizing agents. Another common practice is exchanging the 
hydrophobic ligands with carboxyl/amino terminated hydro-
philic hydrocarbon ligands like citrate acid, poly(ethylene 
glycol) (PEG)-phosphate, poly(acrylic acid) (PAA), and polyeth-
ylenimine (PEI) etc., which can coordinate with the Ln3+ ions 
doped on the surface of UCNPs matrix.[47] In addition to above, 
the UCNPs surface can be also conjugated with proteins like 
bovine serum albumin,[66,67] peptides,[68,69] enzymes,[70] which 
were used for various bio-applications.
Surface capped hydrophilic UCNPs are finally conjugated 
with various biomolecules of particular interest, for instance, 
microbial membrane targeting ligands like glycopeptides, pro-
teins, and antibodies. Moreover, the surface bioconjugation can 
be applied by covalently modifying the carboxyl/amino termi-
nated ligand appendage with the carboxyl/thiol terminated bio-
molecules via well-known EDC/NHS cross-coupling chemistry.
2. Multifunctional UCNPs for Light-Driven 
Multimodal Antibacterial Therapy
Considering the ever-increasing danger posed by the drug-
resistant bacteria, its biofilm formations and superbugs; the 
development of nanomaterials as an alternative to synthetic 
antibiotic has attained momentum with respect to the slug-
gish pace faced in the development of molecular analogues.[8,71] 
Among these, UCNPs appear to be more promising due to 
their anti-stoke emission features, which is widely explored 
in cancer nanomedicine research. This could be utilized for 
aPDT by exploiting UCNPs design principles developed for 
tumor therapy. Antibacterial resistance is more rampant in bac-
teria unlike tumor, and bacterial colonies not easily amenable 
to single therapy mode due to their highly heterogenized yet 
highly organized biofilm-based extracellular structures.[72] More-
over, the single-mode applications of well-known antibacterial 
agents like copper and silver nanoparticles as an alternative to 
antibiotics is also recently found to be resistant in some bacte-
rial types.[73,74] Altogether, it demands combination therapy or 
methods targeting multiple bacterial targets and thereby killing 
pathogens involving multiple mechanistic pathways.
Based on the above rationale, this review illustrates UCNPs 
nanosystems composing multiple antibacterial agents to impart 
multimodal antibacterial therapy. The following sections are 
further categorized into subsections in terms of material com-
position. Alternatively, literature reports potential to open up 
new directions in the current state-of-the-art of multimodal 
aPDT are reserved into separate sections (Sections 2.4–2.6) for 
the sake of clarity.
2.1. UCNPs-Silica Composite for Multimodal Therapy
One of the early report on the multimodal antibacterial therapy 
(PDT and PTT combined) by Qu and co-workers revealed that 
core–shell UCNPs were used and coated with SiO2 having 
entrapped a methylene blue PS (MB) and CuS nanoparticles on its 
surface (Figure 5).[75] Upon NIR photoirradiation at 980 nm, the 
MB is photosensitized to produce ROS for aPDT actions. Simul-
taneously, the CuS could generate localized heating effect for PTT 
effects. The highlight of this work was the achievement of syner-
gistic antibacterial therapy under one single continuous-wave laser 
irradiation. The core–shell UCNPs showed antibacterial activity 
in both Gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus and Gram-nega-
tive Escherichia coli, by ≈99%, when both PDT and PTT applied 
synergistically.
The core–shell nanostructure made with silica coating is 
also widely used for decorating the exterior of the UCNPs. 
This also typically helps in improving the overall water solu-
bility of nanosystem and improving the cell membrane per-
meability/biocompatibility. Such surface functionalization also 
provides an easy way to incorporate therapeutic agents.[57] The 
mesoporous silica-coated on the UCNPs surface can be further 
functionalized with various targeting agents like PS or bacterial 
membrane targeting ligands.[30] A core–shell mesoporous 
silica-coated NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs (mSiO2@UCNPs) is used 
in this regard by entrapping hydrophobic PS, Si-phathalocya-
nine (silicon-2,9,16,23-tetra-tert-butyl-29H,31H-phthalocyanine 
Figure 4.  The surface modification of UCNPs with various ligation 
methods. Schematic representation of several strategies used for sur-
face modification of UCNPs, like inorganic surface silanization, ligand 
exchange, amphiphilic polymer coating, ligand removal, and ligand 
oxidation.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480
 16163028, 2021, 43, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202104480 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2104480  (7 of 21)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
dihydroxide) into the silica shell, which is further functional-
ized with poly(vinylpyrrolidone) polymer (PVP) and other cati-
onic ligands to enhance the bacterial membrane binding.[76] 
Directly exciting the hybrid UCNPs with NIR light led to the 
complete eradication of E. coli and a drastic decrease of colony-
forming units of S. aureus of up to seven orders of magnitude. 
Further, the bactericidal effects of UCNPs are controlled by the 
modification of mesoporous silica shell thickness and PVP con-
jugation, which in turn dictate the bacterial membrane binding 
of UCNPs and diffusion of loaded PS.
2.2. UCNPs-Polymer Composite for Multimodal Therapy
Analogously, LiYF4:Yb/Er based UCNPs are coated with an 
organic polymer like PVP, which is also allowing the incorpo-
ration of methylene blue-based PS as PDT agent,[77] to finally 
target the extremely drug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii 
(XDR-AB) in deep tissue and disrupt the bacterial cell mem-
brane therein (Figure 6A). The authors have also proved that the 
UCNPs are effectively treating in vivo bacterial infections by the 
energy transfer to the loaded PS, thereby allowing NIR-triggered 
generation of ROS for destroying the bacterial cell membrane.[77]
As an alternative to silica in core–shell UCNPs, the anti-
microbial polymer, that is, cationic N-octyl chitosan (OC) was 
coated alone on UCNPs, and the composite was incorpo-
rated with Zn(II)-phthalocyanine as PS (Figure  6B). Conse-
quently, a significant improvement in the antibacterial efficacy 
against multidrug-resistant (MDR) bacteria in deep tissue was 
achieved.[78] The core–shell UCNPs displayed a higher UCL 
efficiency with respect to its core alone counterpart. The innate 
antibacterial features of chitosan and PDT based ROS actions 
induced a dual-mode antibacterial effect on the drug-resistant 
bacteria, including methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) and 
β-lactamase-producing E. coli. Finally, the in vivo studies on 
murine MRSA-infected abscesses in the deep tissue (1 cm) 
also confirmed the dual-mode anti-MRSA efficacy of UCNPs. 
Another antimicrobial agent, curcumin is also conjugated on 
UCNPs through a PEI bridge to achieve MRSA bactericidal 
actions both in vivo and in vitro. The UCNPs-curcumin hybrid 
assembly was able to produce ample ROS for effective bacterial 
killing in the lungs of mice with 980 nm NIR irradiations.[79] 
Alternatively, the UCNPs shell can be made with polymer-based 
PS itself for efficient energy transfer between the UCNPs core 
and the polymer shell for aPDT. In this regard, seleno-viologen 
based cationic polymer is developed and coated on the UCNPs 
surface through PAA ligand moieties toward synergistic PDT 
and PTT actions (Figure  7A).[80] The hybrid UCNPs system 
showed strong ROS actions and high PTT effects at the lowest 
NIR irradiation condition reported to date (λex = 980 nm, 150 
mW cm−2, 4 min) and further proved the efficacy of the syner-
gistic therapy toward MRSA bactericidal effect.
Noticeably, UCNPs are used for sensing the drug-resistant 
bacteria over drug-sensitive bacteria and inducing PDT therein 
by employing heterodimers of UCNPs and gold yolk-shell 
(Au-YS) nanoparticles (Figure  7B).[81] Unlike hybrid UCNPs 
assemblies directly inducing bactericidal effects, here the 
UCNPs-(Au-YS) heterodimer gives different circular dichroism 
(CD) signals and upconversion luminescence in polymyxin-B-
resistant and sensitive E. coli bacterial strains. First, the UCNPs 
surface was decorated with polymyxin B, and Au-YS with anti-
polymyxin-B-antibody and they bind each other to form lumi-
nescent heterodimers via antigen–antibody recognition. The 
polymyxin B-UCNPs are first incubated in both sensitive and 
Figure 5.  The core–shell UCNPs entrapped with PS, CuS, and chitosan for multimodal aPDT. a) A schematic representation showing the development 
of UCNPs core–shell assembly with silica doped MB, CuS, and chitosan (UCNPs@silica:MB/CuS/chitosan), and its application in multimodal aPDT. 
b–d) The TEM images showing the crystal patterns of each component of UCNPs hybrid systems; NaYF4:Mn/Yb/Er UCNPs (b), UCNPs/MB-NH2 (c), 
UCNPs@silica:MB/CuS/chitosan (d). Reproduced with permission.[75] Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480
 16163028, 2021, 43, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202104480 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2104480  (8 of 21)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
resistant strains and afford poor migration into the resistant 
bacterial cells. Consequently, the addition of Au-YS results 
in the formation of heterodimers having the UCL and CD 
signal intensity significantly higher at extracellular sites of the 
resistant bacteria in comparison with the sensitive strain, where 
the heterodimers would not be efficiently formed. Hence the 
different level of CD and UCL signals of heterodimers and their 
different extracellular and intracellular yields are directly corre-
lated to the distinct interactions of UCNPs on the drug-resistant 
and sensitive bacterial strains, which is also proved in clinical 
samples. Finally, the bactericidal effects studied by exploiting 
the ROS actions from the plasmonic Au-YS found to be more 
potent than prototypical dyes like protoporphyrin IX and also 
demonstrated the aPDT effects in in vivo mice experiments. 
This method is a significant improvement among the state-of-
the-art of efficient UCNPs for a clinical diagnostic application.
2.3. UCNPs Assembled Therapeutically Active Ligands for Multi-
modal Biofilm Eradication
Rather than applying for aPDT applications detailed above, the 
UCNPs could be also utilized for NIR triggered photocleavage 
of antimicrobial agents, which are covalently conjugated on 
the surface of functionalized UCNPs. Here a hybrid UCNPs is 
explored for the NIR triggered photocleavage of d-amino acids 
and its delivery to drug-resistant bacterial biofilms (Figure 8A). 
Actually, in biofilms, the bacteria show 10–100-fold resistance to 
the synthetic antibiotics than their planktonic analogues via the 
formation of the thick and self-replicated extracellular polymeric 
matrix.[14] Its already been reported that d-amino acids promote 
biofilm dispersion and release of the bacterial cells in the plank-
tonic state from a mature biofilm sessile state.[82] So, the NIR 
photorelease of d-amino acids to the biofilms are achieved by 
conjugating a UV cleavable appendage on d-amino acids, which 
in turn adsorbed onto the UCNP core via TiO2 shell.[83] Upon 
excitation with NIR light, the UCL from the UCNPs hybrid 
assembly undergoes energy transfer to the TiO2 shells, resulting 
in the ROS generation and photocleavage of d-amino acid toward 
aPDT. Since bacterial biofilm formation is one of the common 
problems on surfaces in the hospital or other industrial settings, 
the aforementioned assemblies could be coated on the nanode-
vices to provide a general means to disassemble the biofilms.
Nitric oxide (NO) is also known as a potent regulator of bio-
film dispersion by triggering the signal pathway involved in the 
alteration of cyclic di-GMP (c-di-GMP) level, which in turn acti-
vate a range of effects leading to biofilm dispersion.[84] Addition-
ally, light-driven NO-release by exogenous molecules generate 
NO-based reactive nitrogen species (RNS), which acts as a pow-
erful antibacterial agent.[85] In the case of aPDT, NO has been 
also utilized for the synergistic eradication of antibiotic-resistant 
bacterial biofilms, both in vitro and in vivo. Similar to the ROS, 
to achieve this, UCNPs-mSiO2 was impregnated with a known 
UV/vis active NO-donor, that is, Roussin’s black salt (RBS), and 
further coated with an antibacterial quaternized ammonium 
chitosan polymer (qC) to afford UCNPs hybrid system (RBS@
NaGdF4:Yb/Tm@mSiO2@qC, Figure  8B).[86] Following NIR-
induced excitation of UCNPs, UCL attributes for the photoin-
duced release of NO from RBS. While acting as a natural antibac-
terial agent, qC infiltrate the biofilm matrix to establish contact 
with the entrenched cells and target the bacterial membrane.[86] 
Finally, the UCNPs-based systems are found to induce MRSA 
biofilm eradication via their synergistic therapeutic actions.
2.4. UCNPs Nanocomposites for aPDT and Other Combination 
Antibacterial Therapy
As discussed above, the UCNPs-based multimodal systems 
appear to be more promising in aPDT due to their unique 
Figure 6.  The core–shell UCNPs coated with PVP polymer/chitosan and PS for in vivo aPDT. A) A scheme depicting the development of UCNPs 
core–shell assembly coated with PVP polymer, which is further doped with RB-based PS, LiYF4:Yb/Er@PVP:RB and their final application against bac-
terial infections of Acinetobacter baumannii. Reproduced with permission.[77] Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. B) A schematic diagram of 
a core–shell UCNPs coated with PS loaded chitosan and their final in vivo antibacterial applications. Reproduced with permission.[78] Copyright 2017, 
Royal Society of Chemistry.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480
 16163028, 2021, 43, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202104480 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2104480  (9 of 21)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
Figure 7.  The core–shell UCNPs coated with either selenoviologen polymer or its heterodimer formation with gold yolk-shell nanoparticles for anti-
bacterial theranostics. A) A scheme showing the synthetic procedure and assembling of NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4 UCNPs coated with polyacrylic acid 
conjugated with selenoviologen polymer and their final application against MRSA bacterial infection both in vitro and in vivo. Reproduced with permis-
sion.[80] Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. B) A schematic illustration of Au-YS and UCNPs heterodimer binding with polymyxin B resistant 
or sensitive bacteria used for the quantitative detection and imaging (a) and the chemical structure of lipid A, PEA-4′-Lipid A, and polymyxin B (b). 
Reproduced with permission.[81] Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480
 16163028, 2021, 43, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202104480 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2104480  (10 of 21)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
feature of upconverting low energy NIR light into higher 
energy luminescence, which could be exploited for deep-
seated in vivo infections. At the same time, UCNPs can also 
emit lower energy NIR light, called photon downconversion 
luminescence through the same mechanism. In UCNPs, the 
upconversion luminescence process occurs at the first bio-
logical window region (700–950 nm),[47] where water and bio-
molecules also absorb. However, in the case of the photon 
downconversion luminescence process (1000–1500 nm, 
second biological window), the light possesses deep tissue 
penetration, negligible optical scattering and autofluores-
cence.[87] In this regard, hybrid UCNPs are developed by 
exploiting the downconverted luminescence for bactericidal 
applications (Figure  8B).[88] As suggested by the authors, 
rationally designed UCNPs systems doped with other Ln3+ 
ions, could be utilized for accessing the NIR II window 
(1000–1700 nm) for aPDT. In this direction, the core–shell 
nanosystem is being made by the integration of a down-
converting luminescent NaGdF4:Nd layer (shell) on the 
surface of NaYF4:Yb,Er (core). A silica shell was coated addi-
tionally on the core–shell UCNPs to improve its dispers-
ibility in aqueous medium, as well as its biocompatibility 
(Figure  9). This also helps in entrapping suitable PS like 
rose Bengal (RB). Since Gd3+ ion acts as a paramagnetic 
contrast agent in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the 
presented UCNPs can enable the MRI features together 
with PDT actions.[89] Upon excitation with 808 nm, the 
UCNPs exhibited a strong downconverted luminescence 
at 1060 nm which can penetrate ≈5 mm into the tissue 
and also cause relaxivity as an MRI contrast agent similar 
to FDI approved agents. Whereas the 980 nm excitation of 
UCNPs induces the ROS generated aPDT in MRSA and 
E. coli cells, and opening a new direction where aPDT, MRI 
and downconverted imaging are converged into a single 
hybrid UCNPs.
Another approach of circumventing limited penetration 
of UCL into the tissues is reported recently by merging both 
ultrasound (sonodynamic therapy, SDT) and aPDT into UCNPs 
for the bactericidal action. Here a yolk-structured multifunc-
tional UCNPs are developed by entrapping hematoporphyrin 
monomethyl ether into the yolk-structure UCNPs core and RB-
based PS-silica conjugate coated on the surface of UCNPs as 
a shell.[90] The practical simplicity of SDT is that most of PSs 
can be used as sonosensitizers and combined with UCNPs 
for the synergistic therapy of both PDT and SDT,[91] pre-
cluding further design complexity on the hybrid UCNPs. The 
as-designed yolk-structure multifunctional UCNPs displayed 
100% bactericidal effects in the case of MRSA, and “extended 
Figure 8.  The core–shell UCNPs for mitigating bacterial biofilms and therapy therein. A) A schematic representation of UCNPs hybrid nanosystem for 
biofilm disassembly and bactericidal effects. The UCNPs were first coated with TiO2 and further linked with d-amino acid, β-NaYF4:Yb3+/Tm3+@TiO2-
D-tyr (a). (b) The amino acid, d-tyrosine could be cleaved by the upconverveted UV emission from the UCNPs core and ROS actions from coated TiO2. 
B) A scheme showing the working principle of RBS@UCNPs@mSiO2@qC hybrid system; the method of fabrication of nanocomposite (a), mode of 
NIR irradiation of antibiotic-resistant bacterial biofilms with UCNPs hybrid systems (b), TEM images of UCNPs hybrid systems and its magnified por-
tions (c,d), and its FT-IR spectrum (e). Reproduced with permission.[86] Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480
 16163028, 2021, 43, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202104480 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2104480  (11 of 21)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
spectrum beta-lactamase” -producing E. coli strains by in vitro. 
To note, this potent bactericidal effect results from the syn-
ergistic actions of both PDT and SDT combined and is more 
significant than their respective individual application.[90] Simi-
larly, the classical antibacterial agents like silver NPs is also 
integrated onto the hybrid assemblies of UCNPs, mesoporous 
SiO2 and rose Bengal to form a nanocomposite, UCNPs@
mSiO2(RB)-AgNPs which upon irradiation with NIR light 
results multimodal bactericidal effects in MRSA. This resulted 
from the combination of PDT, SDT, and AgNPs in a single 
nanodevice.[92]
2.5. Antibacterial Therapy by Photocatalytic UCNPs Systems
The last decade has witnessed a paradigm shift in the photoin-
duced processes where photocatalysis has revamped the field of 
photoscience beyond mere photodynamic processes and energy 
harvesting.[93–95] Alternatively, photoinduced processes using 
designer molecules, molecular assemblies, and materials devel-
oped for photocatalysis have opened up new clinical/therapeutic 
opportunities in recent years.[94,93] Here setting a new research 
line for PDT by relying on photocatalysis might procreate a new 
avenue in the current state-of-the-art of antimicrobial therapy. Ide-
ally, photoactivable materials for biological or energy applications 
share a common route of generating electron–hole pair combi-
nation (exciton) at its excited state and transferring the excitons 
to the nearby substrate, leading to radical chain reactions either 
for small molecule activations or ROS/RNS generation for thera-
peutic purposes.[96] Further, a UCNPs nanosystem can be simply 
coated with the commonly used heterogeneous photocatalytic 
material toward various problems in biomedical therapy. One 
example in this regard has been reported recently, where a pho-
tocatalytic nanoplatform comprising of a UCNPs-based shell is 
coated on the surface of Au/dark-TiO2 core, and finally activated 
by NIR light (Figure 10A).[97] Here the ROS is produced from the 
AuNPs/dark-TiO2 core through a photo­catalytic pathway upon 
energy transfer upconversion from the NIR active UCNPs shell. 
As a proof of concept, a model antibiotic, ampicillin sodium 
(AMP) was conjugated covalently onto the UCNPs hybrid system 
through silane monolayers and studied its NIR triggered delivery 
into AMP-resistant E. coli bacterial colony.
The NIR-induced excitation results in UCL from the UCNPs, 
which cleaves the conjugated AMP and also generates ROS 
from AuNPs/TiO2 core to the desired site. The photocatalysis 
process in TiO2 occurs by the photogeneration of excitons, 
which can subsequently be ejected into the surrounding media 
to generate ROS like species; hydroxyl radicals (•OH) super-
oxide anion (•O2−), H2O2 and 1O2. Importantly, ROS species 
produced through the photocatalytic process is reported to be 
long-lived, unlike the conventional PDT actions in which the 
ROS photogeneration is ceased once the delivery of the pho-
todrugs is fully finished. Another analogous example includes 
core–shell heterostructure where UCNPs (NaYF4:Yb/Er/Nd@
NaYF4:Nd) acts as the core and Mn-doped TiO2 as the shell 
(Figure  10B).[98] The as-synthesized UCNPs exhibit strong 
UCL and higher luminescence efficiency upon coating with 
NaYF4:Nd shell around NaYF4:Yb/Er/Nd core followed by the 
Mn-doped TiO2 nanocrystals coated on the surface. The design 
strategy allowed fervent energy transfer from the core to TiO2 
shell toward NIR induced photocatalytic generation of ROS 
species. Finally, the photocatalytic bactericidal effects were 
demonstrated in Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria 
under 808 nm irradiation. Significantly, this excitation wave-
length could suggestively avoid background heating, which oth-
erwise is a typical issue with 980 nm. The above studies reveal 
the possibility of exploiting the role of TiO2 as photocatalyst and 
considering the vast and comprehensive research attained in 
photoredox catalysis in the last decade, it remains to be seen 
yet how the fervent excited state electron and energy transfer 
processes involved in photocatalysis would be utilized for anti-
microbial therapy or other biomedical therapy applications. 
This leaves out a huge knowledge gap in translating the know-
how of immensely popular photocatalysis toward antimicrobial 
therapy applications and offers a cross-disciplinary effort to 
solve challenging microbial infections.
Figure 9.  A UCNPs made into a nanorod with the possibility to operate in 
NIR II region. a) A scheme of UCNPs coated with PS loaded SiO2, TEM 
images of b) NaYF4:Yb/Er, c) NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaGdF4:Nd, and d) core-shell 
UCNPs with SiO2 and rose Bengal PS. e,f) The emission spectra after exci-
tation with 980 and 808 nm excitation of UCNPs core and g,h) the proposed 
energy transfer pathway in luminescence of core–shell UCNPs. Reproduced 
with permission.[88] Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480
 16163028, 2021, 43, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202104480 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2104480  (12 of 21)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
Figure 10.  A nitric oxide releasing UCNPs nanoplatform for disrupting biofilm and therapy therein. Further demonstration of photoredox catalysis with 
UCNPs-based core–shell nanosystems. A) The scheme showing the mode of preparation of D-TiO2/Au@UCNPs and the NIR-light regulated drug 
release from the nanohybrid structures. Reproduced with permission.[97] Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. B) A scheme showing the working 
principle of Yb/Er/Nd@Nd@Mn:TiO2 photocatalyst and ROS actions under 808 nm NIR irradiation. Reproduced with permission.[98] Copyright 2019, 
American Chemical Society.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480
 16163028, 2021, 43, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202104480 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2104480  (13 of 21)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2.6. UCNPs-Based Assemblies for Alternate Antibacterial 
Therapy
Apart from developing drug delivery nanosystems targeting 
the bacterial colonies or biofilms, the UCNPs can be also 
impregnated onto the 2D surface to be applicable for topical 
applications like wound healing. Based on this, a nanocom-
posite polymer membrane coated with UCNPs has been made 
by electrospinning methods. First, the UCNPs is coated with 
silica shell incorporating methylene blue as aPDT agents.[99] 
Upon irradiation with NIR light, the entire nanocomposite 
membrane was bactericidal by ROS action and it was dem-
onstrated further by their action on both Gram-positive and 
Gram-negative bacteria.
Similar to the above, a nanocomposite membrane of 
UCNPs with both PDT and PTT bactericidal effects is 
developed by electrospinning techniques (Figure  11A).[100] 
The UCNPs-based nanorod is made from the core–shell 
Figure 11.  A UCNPs based nanocomposite membrane with multimodal antibacterial therapy features and a UCNPs nanorod self-assembled with 
cyclodextrin for reversible bacteria clustering. A) The scheme showing the development of UCNPs@TiO2 core−shell nanoparticles made into an elec-
trospun nanocomposite membrane with graphene oxides (a), The PDT and PTT-based combined action of UCNPs membrane toward in vivo aPDT (b). 
Reproduced with permission.[100] Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. B) A scheme showing the NIR-light induced reversible bacteria clustering 
with UCNPs-CD hybrids. Reproduced with permission.[101] Copyright 2019, Elsevier.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480
 16163028, 2021, 43, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202104480 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2104480  (14 of 21)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
nanostructure; NaYF4:Yb/Tm acts as the core and the outer 
shell is made by TiO2 nanoparticles. The PTT agent, nanog-
raphene oxide was then doped into the UCNPs followed by 
the electrospinning with poly(vinylidene) fluoride (PVDF) to 
form the final nanocomposite membrane. Upon excitation 
with single NIR light, the nanocomposite membrane could 
simultaneously generate ROS and localized heat, prompting 
more efficient synergistic bactericidal actions in Gram-pos-
itive and Gram-negative bacteria, with respect their indi-
vidual application. Finally, this nanocomposite was utilized 
for wound healing applications and found that it could effec-
tively restrain inflammation at wounds and accelerate the 
healing process under NIR irradiation.
Irrespective 
of 
antibacterial 
PDT 
applications, 
the 
control over the cell–cell interactions in bacterial colo-
nies are also regulated by UCNPs based hybrid assembly 
made of covalently adsorbed β-cyclodextrins (β-CD) and 
photochromic 
azobenzene 
tethered 
mannose 
glyco-
conjugates (Figure  11B).[101] Upon excitation with NIR 
light, the UCL from UCNPs triggers the photoisomeri-
zation 
of 
CD-encapsulated 
azobenzene-mannose, 
in 
which mannose is known to bind membrane receptors of 
E. coli, leading to the reversible dispersion and clustering of 
the bacterial colonies both in vivo and in vitro.
3. Multifunctional UCNPs for Antifungal 
Photodynamic Therapy
As described above, aPDT with UCNPs has been an 
emerging research direction in antibacterial therapy and 
raised significant interest in the pursuit of antibiotic-free 
drug delivery systems. Since the fungal colony or its biofilm 
can be irradiated in the same way as bacteria, the design 
principle of UCNPs could be translated to fungal infections 
as well (Figure 12).
Whereas the application of the same for fungal infection 
has been quite untouched and demands serious attention to 
overcome total antimicrobial drug-resistance. Around 6 million 
people die of invasive fungal infections and received very little 
attention compared to their counterparts like antibacterial and 
antiviral therapy.[102] The treatment of systemic fungal infection 
often considered difficult to treat and current major antibiotics 
exhibit low biodistribution and lack of selectivity, poor water sol-
ubility, susceptible to resistance, and other serious side effects. 
Here aPDT based various nanosystems has been applied as an 
adjuvant to major antifungal drugs like amphotericin B (AmB), 
which are already susceptible to fungal resistance. Nevertheless, 
the MDR in fungi can be evaded by the drug targeting via mem-
brane-bound ergosterols, glucan polysaccharides, or other gen-
eral fungal antibodies, and which might be further implemented 
by the suitable ligand anchoring on the NP surface and gen-
erate aPDT therein. Ideally, this could give attractive therapy 
alternatives against fungal pathogens among other prevailing 
methods.[103] Amidst the diverse nanoparticles used for antifungal 
therapy, the gold NPs (AuNPs) combined with PSs have been uti-
lized as a ROS based aPDT agent in Candida albicans biofilms.[104] 
The AuNPs is also assumed to interact directly with the lipids 
and membrane proteins and destabilize the cell membrane of the 
fungal cells. Similarly, general PDT has been utilized for treating 
various fungal lesions including drug-resistant biofilms like Can-
dida biofilms at both in vitro and in vivo level.[105] However, only 
one study has been reported so far where UCNPs are reported 
for antifungal infections. Here LiYF4:Yb/Er based ligand free 
UCNPs were conjugated with the PS, β-carboxyphthalocyanine 
zinc (CPZ), followed by coating the UCNPs core by the 
polymer polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) to prevent the aggrega-
tion between the PS units and to confer water solubility and 
biocompatibility.[106] This UCNPs nanosystem was shown to 
inhibit deep-tissue MDR bacteria such as MRSA and MDR 
E. coli upon 980 nm laser irradiation for both in vitro and in vivo 
studies. To prove the antifungal therapy, the authors selected a 
prototype fungi model, C. albicans, one of the most commonly 
encountered human fungal pathogen, which shows the drug-
resistance to a variety of antibiotics.[106] This report reveals that 
the antifungal activity of UCNPs-CPZ-PVP is evident in a dose-
dependent manner on excitation with NIR light.
4. Multifunctional UCNPs for Antiviral 
Photodynamic Therapy
Similar to antibacterial and antifungal therapy, using aPDT for 
antiviral therapy offers another promising alternative, especially 
in the context of COVID-19 infection, which is arguably one 
of the most serious healthcare issues of the current century. 
Current antiviral therapy relies on antiviral drugs and vaccines 
which recognize specific parts of an enveloped or a nonenvel-
oped virus as the therapeutic target.
However very high mutagenicity of viral membrane proteins 
and the genetic heterogeneity of virus pose a serious challenge 
on the effective application of antiviral drugs or vaccines and its 
universal development as “one for all type”.[89] The highly spe-
cific drug targeting of virus like current drug development are 
less likely to be successful for the emerging viruses as they 
undergo continuous mutation over its binding sites and prone 
to the rapid emergence of drug-resistance as explained for other 
Figure 12.  The scheme showing the aPDT applications induced by 
UCNPs systems in general fungal cells.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480
 16163028, 2021, 43, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202104480 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2104480  (15 of 21)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
microbial infections.[3,7] In this regard, developing nanosystems 
for viral therapy could be an effective strategy as it can be tailored 
with various targeting moieties to mimic the viral particles and 
interfering with the multivalent viral interactions with specific 
host cells. As the NPs surface can be easily conjugated with viral 
receptors, peptides or proteins, antibodies, they suppress specific 
checkpoints in the viral lifecycle like suppression of receptor 
bound endocytosis, fusion of viral particles with the membrane, 
mitochondrial activation or inactivation, inhibition of viral 
genome replication, and RNA-crosslinking.[107] Further the cur-
rent limitation of viral drugs like poor water solubility and low 
circulation time, high toxicity, low dose at the infection site can 
be easily averted by modifying the surface properties and other 
physicochemical features of nanosystems.[108,109] Despite this and 
considering the current emergent situation posed by the nCoV-2 
infections, it is a worthwhile idea to utilize the nanotechnology 
tools toward developing Covid-19 vaccines or drugs while relying 
on the as-developed nanosystems meant for other diseases.
Historically, the antiviral PDT application dates back to 
1970’s, where ROS generation by PDT was utilized to inacti-
vate virus proteins, nucleic acids, and possible lipids of the viral 
membrane.[110] In this way, many molecular PS’s were devel-
oped for photodynamic inactivation of different virus types, 
like herpes simplex virus, human papilloma virus, and human 
immunodeficiency virus, influenza A virus.[111,112] However, 
these molecular PS generally suffer from poor solubility with 
aggregation in water, poor target specificity, and activation only 
with UV/vis wavelength.[111] To address this, a UCNPs nanoplat-
form can be implemented for aPDT against various emerging 
viral infections (Figure  13), and which has already been 
made for the antiviral actions against Dengue virus serotype 
2 (DENV2, New Guinea C strain) and others like adenovirus 
type 5.[113] The UCNPs is constituted from NaYF4:Yb3+/Er3+  
nanoparticles, coated with water soluble PEI polymer and a zinc 
phthalocyanine PS inside pores. The photoexcitation of UCNPs 
at 980 nm induced the ROS actions and led to the inactivation 
of both the enveloped and nonenveloped viruses. Interestingly, 
in vivo studies demonstrated the survival rate of virus infected 
mice near 100% by the treatment with 440 µg mL−1 of UCNPs 
suspension. Additionally, the active targeting was obtained by 
conjugating UCNPs with a targeting antibody ligand, specific 
for the DENV2 envelope protein, and results in the specific 
localization of UCNPs in virus-infected cells. Further, signifi-
cant virucidal actions were also observed in the infected area of 
non-enveloped viruses like AdV5.
5. Safety, Biocompatibility, and Antimicrobial 
Efficacy of UCNPs
Nanomedicine is a fast-evolving field, which faces accelerated 
innovations in developing nanodrugs for various theranostic 
applications and some of them are already under clinical trials. 
Of late, the nanomedicine community has turned their atten-
tion to various microbial infections while considering the 
rampant emergence of antibiotic resistance and its societal 
repercussion, and also in part due to the possibility of trans-
lating the know-how of the nanomaterials developed for cancer 
nanomedicine. Regardless of developing various nanoparticles 
for the same, the effective antimicrobial nanomaterials should 
exhibit a very low or negligible toxicity profile and minimum or 
negligible damage to the healthy cells near the wounds (or in 
vivo infection sites) to be applicable for long-term therapeutic 
applications. Despite the extensive research been devoted to 
the development of therapeutically relevant nanomaterials in 
general, the majority of them appear to be far from clinical 
trials. Specifically, in the case of UCNPs, the in vitro and in 
vivo toxicity should be assessed by analyzing their pharmacoki-
netics and pharmacodynamics, cytotoxicity, biodegradation, 
metabolism, biocompatibility with major organs like liver and 
spleen, circulation time, and finally excretion.[114,115] Moreover, 
the mechanism of its uptake and clearance depends heavily on 
the types of tissues being analyzed and also vary upon changes 
in the physicochemical features of NPs or its surface func-
tional groups. Since the UCNPs are generally coated by hydro-
phobic alkyl chains, which is soluble in nonpolar solvents and 
can also elicit systemic toxicity. Whereas the UCNPs can be 
readily coated by biocompatible and hydrophilic polymers like 
PEG, PAA, PVP, SiO2, proteins, peptides etc.[57] The in vitro 
cytotoxicity studies with mitochondrial metabolic assays show 
lower cytotoxicity of UCNPs at low concentration threshold 
(500 µg mL−1 and an incubation time of 12 h).[114,116] Another 
report shows, after feeding with the polymer PEI-coated UCNPs, 
Caenorhabditis elegans and HeLa cells exhibit no toxicity upto a 
dosage of 100 µg mL−1.[117] Whereas, assessing the biosafety of 
UCNPs materials in in vitro cell culture is also somewhat dif-
ficult as it follows a mere qualitative procedure of checking the 
cell morphology, viability, and mitochondrial actions of the cells 
upon mixing with UCNPs. In view of the antimicrobial therapy, 
mere in vitro studies would not suffice to give a clear picture of 
the microbicidal actions. For instance, the bactericidal action of 
UCNPs in Petri dish experiments would not necessarily apply 
to all strains equally and can pose the threat of drug-resistance 
(aPDT can potentially bypass this issue). Further, clinically sig-
nificant antimicrobial therapy means the reduction of 3–4 log 
unit reductions (≈99.99% reduction) in the colony-forming 
units, but the current state-of-the art reports 1–2 log unit reduc-
tions, which accounts for the bactericidal action approximately 
<90%, which are microbiologically insignificant.[118]
Figure 13.  A general scheme showing the aPDT applications induced by 
UCNPs systems in viral particles.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480
 16163028, 2021, 43, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202104480 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2104480  (16 of 21)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
The detailed in vivo studies show that the UCNPs can 
be accumulated in reticuloendothelial systems after the 
intravenous injections and their body clearance depends on 
the size of the nanoparticles.[119] The PAA coated ultra-small 
UCNPs of ≈10 nm was found to be excreted from the mice after 
115 days.[120] Also, the in vivo histocompatibility studies shows 
that the intravenously injected PAA-UCNPs core–shell struc-
tures can live long inside mice for a long time without any 
apparent adverse effects to the major organs.[119] Additionally, 
a glutathione modified sub-ten nm sized UCNPs is found to 
be excreted from the mice in 2 weeks.[121] Another study reports 
the bioavailability, biodistribution, and toxicity of generally 
used silica-coated UCNPs (NaYF4:Yb,Er@SiO2), which were 
applied in mice. Specifically, the UCNPs accumulate in bone, 
stomach, and intestinal parts of mice while administered orally 
and in the liver and spleen by intravenous administration. Fur-
ther, these studies did not show any acute toxicity in mice even 
after applying a high dose of 100 mg kg−1 orally.[122] Albeit these 
studies, it remains to be studied the detailed pharmacokinetics 
and pharmacodynamic features of UCNPs, especially at their 
various nanometric sizes and shapes. Moreover, most studies 
are reported in using UCNPs for alleviating or curing microbial 
infections, but the mice can cure the infection by their mecha-
nism without the assistance of any antimicrobial drugs, and 
such studies are typically being conducted in young mice.[123] 
Nevertheless, these results would give a better understanding 
of the possible adverse effects, circulation time, and biodistri-
bution of UCNPs antimicrobial systems through the body and 
up to its clearance.
Since the aPDT relies on light irradiation, inexpensive, and 
safe light sources are needed for in vitro or in vivo applica-
tions. In the case of UCNPs, the usual excitation of nanosys-
tems is performed at 980 and 808 nm, or at the NIR II window. 
According to the American National Standards for the use of 
lasers, only a few hundreds of mW cm−2 are the maximum 
permissible exposure dose of NIR irradiation and the majority 
of UCNPs reported so far lies way above this threshold light 
dose.[30,57] Thus more efficient UCNPs with high upconversion 
quantum yield upon relatively low light excitation needs to be 
engineered for their real-world applications. Further unwanted 
light scattering and consequent heating of Yb3+ sensitized 
UCNPs matrix with 980 nm NIR excitation can be averted by 
doping with Nd3+ ion which follows 808 nm excitations.[30] 
Further, prolonged NIR irradiation may also cause phototox-
icity and tissue damage of the nearby infectious site, but using 
multi-stimuli responsive UCNPs in conjunction with light and 
developing multimodal UCNPs systems with more than one 
therapy mode could be some solutions to avoid these issues.
6. Mechanistic Insights on Overall Antimicrobial 
Therapy with UCNPs
Although the multitude of research reports vividly illus-
trate various proof-of-concept heterostructures made with 
UCNPs, the majority of these studies lack the mechanistic 
insight of their functions in microbes, potential interaction 
with endogenous molecules inside microbial cells. These would 
have helped in addressing critical issues like sensing and 
targeting of various pathogens. In this regard, certain aspects 
of phototherapy need to be studied thoroughly while devel-
oping new ad hoc modified multimodal nanosystems based on 
UCNPs. One of the major issues of UCNP-based phototherapy 
discussed herein is the photogeneration of ROS, (H2O2, •OH 
radicals and 1O2) or RNS in impairing the microbial homeo-
stasis and inducing mortality.
The ROS exert antimicrobial activity while mediating host 
defense against a broad range of pathogens. The majority of 
the ROS (O2•−; H2O2; •OH; 1O2) is generated through the par-
tial reduction of O2 and each of these species induce different 
kinetics and levels of activity at the bio site. Typically, damages 
induced by •OH and 1O2 are more acute than those of O2•− and 
H2O2, as O2•− and H2O2 are less reactive and can be detoxified 
by endogenous antioxidants following enzymatic and non-
enzymatic processes that are induced under oxidative stress.[25] 
On the contrary, detoxification of •OH or 1O2 following an enzy-
matic pathway is not possible and this makes them extremely 
toxic and acutely lethal. However, a higher [O2•−] and [H2O2] 
may overwhelm these defenses. The host-defense mechanism 
is shown to induce ROS generation against pathogens and ROS 
plays a major role in cell signaling and homeostasis of host 
cells.[124] Some conventional bactericidal antibiotics also impart 
oxidative stress in order to kill the bacteria.[125] The general ROS 
mechanism in killing pathogens involves but not limited to, 
membrane depolarization, cell wall damage, and other intracel-
lular damage of cysteine, methionine protein residues, DNA 
and iron–sulfur clusters.[52] However, bacteria also meditate 
with several enzymatic triggers (superoxide dismutase, catalase) 
and antioxidant actions (glutathione, polyamine) to eliminate 
the oxidative stress response. Whereas in the case of nearby 
healthy cells of the infected site, the abnormal ROS level can be 
detrimental and create either carcinogenic condition or apop-
totic cell death due to oxidative damage to organelles including 
DNA, and may lead to an acute scenario in case of nonselec-
tive ROS actions. Hence the ROS actions afford a bidirectional 
mechanism as its surplus cause irreversible damage to both 
healthy and infected cells alike and its deficiency can be easily 
tolerated by the bacterial antioxidant and enzymatic pathway.[126] 
Unfortunately, this dichotomy has not been addressed so far for 
aPDT with UCNPs. Whereas the nonselective ROS action can 
be effectively avoided by the selective targeting of UCNPs con-
jugated with active targeting ligands to the bacteria which can 
further evade healthy cells.
As the bacteria generally forms into sessile biofilms, tar-
geting UCNPs into the biofilm microenvironment is also 
potential strategy to be implemented in the current state-
of-the-art of UCNPs. Since the biofilm behaves like a tumor 
microenvironment with an increased level of H2O2, pH and 
hypoxic nature, the advanced knowledge attained on the 
development of UCNP-based antitumor nanosystems could 
be translated for aPDT. At the same time, the biofilm micro-
environment can easily offset the oxygen based aPDT actions 
demanding more innovative approaches of multimodal 
aPDT by UCNPs. Nevertheless, oxidative stress and ROS are 
extremely sensitive to extracellular matrices of biofilm and 
its components like extracellular DNA (eDNA), polysaccha-
ride, and proteins. Hence the nonphotodynamic generation of 
ROS by new methods like chemodynamic therapy (CDT) can 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480
 16163028, 2021, 43, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202104480 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2104480  (17 of 21)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
amplify the specificity, efficiency, and quantum yield of ROS 
generation while coupled with aPDT of UCNPs. To this end, 
the peroxidase enzyme-like catalytic process with metal salts 
via CDT can yield reductive decomposition of biofilm abun-
dant H2O2 into •OH species by evading oxygen dependent 
PDT pathway. The generation of •OH radical based ROS is 
observed to be highly effective against implant related biofilm 
formations, where the •OH radicals can simply cleave abun-
dant eDNA in the biofilms. Similar methods could be trans-
lated in case of UCNPs heterostructure nanocomposites by 
controlled thermolysis methods.
Apart from the chemodynamic generation •OH radicals, 
various means of other ROS can be manifested complemen-
tary to UCNP based aPDT. Recently, it has been a tremendous 
interest among the scientific community to develop enzyme 
mimicking nanomaterials called nanozyme to generate ROS 
via nonphotodynamic means like glucose oxidase and peroxi-
dase. Several Fenton-like reactions were also proposed in this 
regard where Mn, Cu, Ce, V based oxides were reported to act 
as nanozymes.[127,128] Together with this, mitigating antioxidant 
activities in cells by the oxidation of glutathione also has been in 
practice to potentiate the PDT. Indeed, all these methods have 
not been explored in combination with aPDT or with UCNPS, 
creating a promising way of achieving NIR active UCNP-based 
nanozyme. Certainly, due to the enormous opportunities in this 
direction, future UCNP-based materials for multimodal aPDT 
will be based on heterostructure nanocomposites like UCNPs 
fabricated with other novel photoactive and bacterial nanoag-
ents like semiconductors, metal ferrites and carbides, black 
phosphorous, chalcogenides, graphene and carbon nitrides, 
MXenes.[11]
7. Concluding Remarks
In the era of antimicrobial resistance, biofilm formations, and 
other evolution of new microbial pathogens, aPDT based on 
various therapeutic nanosystems seems a promising approach 
which can further exploit finely the advanced knowledge attained 
in cancer nanomedicine during last decades. On this route, the 
present review discusses aPDT based on various lanthanide 
doped upconverting nanoclusters where the entire phototherapy 
can be exclusively regulated by NIR light in both space and time. 
The UCNPs can be designed by various inorganic synthetic 
routes to finally enable an easy access to nonlinear upconversion 
emission of blue, green, red, and NIR light with relatively long 
lifetimes (µs–ms range);[129] which in turn could be utilized for 
various therapeutic applications and other photodynamic process 
relevant in biomedicine. Indeed, UCNPs can be simply prompted 
by common low power CW lasers for the multiphoton excitation 
process, unlike the need of a femtosecond pulsed lasers required 
for the two-photon upconversion experiments involving complex 
and simultaneous excitation of PS into a virtual excited state. 
Herein, the review discusses various UCNPs nanosystems devel-
oped for antibacterial, antifungal, and antiviral therapy applica-
tions, which has been reported in the last decade. In this regard, 
plenty of different kinds UCNPs have been reported by taking 
inspiration from the antitumor nanomedicine. Nevertheless, for 
all of the innumerous possibilities envisioned for aPDT from 
UCNPs, certain shortcomings need to be addressed, which are 
listed below.
1)	 A major limitation of UCNPs for general phototheranostic 
applications arise from their low excitation cross-section and 
upconversion quantum yield (QY ≈ 3–5%) due to intrinsi-
cally low emission from doped Ln3+ ions, also in part due 
to the propensity of nonradiative decay and self-quenching 
between ions.[130] This demands the long-term irradiation 
of NIR light (hours), rendering the tissue excessive heating 
and photodamage. One solution proposed, that is, coordinat-
ing dye PSs on the UCNPs surface to achieve dye sensitized 
upconversion luminescence (QY ≈ 9.8%), but it affords self-
quenching, photobleaching, or even photodissociation of PS 
during the sensitization process.[131] Encapsulating UCNPs 
in micelles might prevent these dissociation, surface bound 
quenching, and other detrimental photodeactivation pathway, 
and additionally make entire nanosystem water soluble.[132] 
Notwithstanding some recent progress made for UCNPs 
based on organic dye PSs,[133] the development of multidi-
mensional materials where UCNPs are incorporated onto 2D 
nanosheets could give a new avenue in improving UCL of 
the entire nanosystems for aPDT applications. Additionally, 
these heteromaterials are not limited by the photobleaching 
or blinking common to organic chromophore assemblies.
2)	 In general, a wide variety photobiological processes can be 
prompted with the blue and green emitted light from UC-
NPs but their blue emission quantum yield is relatively poor 
and accounts a low percentage of energy transition among 
the heavily contributing low-energy emissions.[134] Where-
as Tm3+ and Er3+ doped UCNPs; NaYF4:Yb3+,Tm3+, and 
NaYF4:Yb3+,Er3+ UCNPs, can enhance upconverted blue or 
green light emission, respectively. Additionally, increasing 
the shell thickness in core–shell UCNPs or other surface pas-
sivation approach including surface plasmon enhancement 
is found to increase overall luminescence quantum yield. 
Nevertheless, a low blue emission in UCNPs leaves a narrow 
threshold to design multimodal phototherapeutic systems to 
be applied for aPDT and demands further investigations to-
ward designing new materials with improved blue emission 
upconversion quantum yields.
3)	 From the perspective of aPDT, most of the current UCNPs 
are meant for light-driven production of ROS/RNS for non-
selective microbicidal effects and imaging at the intracellular 
infectious sites, macrophages, and topical wounds. While 
most of these strategies are inspired from the extensive 
antitumor nanomedicine research in the same direction, 
specific targeting approach together with aPDT action might 
be more advantageous for total microbicidal actions and 
reducing the potential side effects (targeted aPDT). General 
targeting agents like proteins (e.g., antibodies), peptides, poly-
saccharides, nucleic acids (e.g., aptamers and small molecules) 
can be linked with UCNPs to target intracellular pathogens, 
biofilm, or even subcellular domain of microbes, which is 
an unexplored terrain so far. In this regard, Das group has 
decorated UCNPs surface with a lysosomal targeting pep-
tide, a C-terminal 20-residue sequence from the lysosome-
associated membrane glycoprotein.[135,136] Finally, the UCNPs-
peptide assembly was utilized for lysosome specific imaging. 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480
 16163028, 2021, 43, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202104480 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2104480  (18 of 21)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
Additionally, the lysosome specificity has been also achieved in 
two-photon excitable upconversion based graphene quantum 
dots, which undergoes translocation into lysosome interior 
from the cytoplasmic region after incubation.[137] Further, an 
UCNPs nanorod applicable for multimodal theranostics were 
also found to target specific organelle like mitochondria after 
the conjugating the former with mitochondria specific triph-
enylphosphonium cation.[138] In a nutshell, all these targeting 
strategies could,[139] in principle, be potentially translated into 
aPDT application against challenging drug-resistant microbes.
4)	 As the majority of UCNPs-based nanosystems or other nano-
materials meant for multimodal aPDT are developed while 
taking inspiration from antitumor therapy, their mere trans-
lation would be counter-productive especially in design prin-
ciples. The concept of photodynamic inactivation requires 
irradiation of cell with light having appropriate energy that 
causes the excitation of exogenous or endogenous photo-
sensitizer molecules to yield ROS, which attributes to cell 
apoptosis.[140] It is generally believed that the efficacy of the 
antitumor activity relies primarily on the effective subcellular 
localization of PS in cancer cells. However, the efficacy of the 
aPDT process for any PS relies on the interaction of PS with 
the microbial cell membrane, its permeability and localiza-
tion.[141] Literature reports reveal that Gram-positive bacteria 
are more susceptible to aPDT and are vulnerable to neutral 
or charged photosensitizer molecules, while cationic PSs are 
generally known to show better bactericidal properties to-
ward Gram-negative bacterial. This difference is attributed to 
the variation in the cell membrane architecture. Fungal cell 
walls offer a permeability barrier that is less than the Gram-
negative but more than Gram-positive bacteria.[141]
5)	 Since the single mode antibacterial agents are prone to bacte-
rial resistance and multimodal antibacterial therapy applica-
tion can potentially avert this situation, multitude of research 
efforts appeared recently illustrating various kinds of mul-
timodal antimicrobial nanosyetms. However least studies 
been done on understanding how the cooperative effects 
and dosage of multiple cytotoxic agents at the same site will 
eventually result total microbicidal actions. For instance in 
the case of gaseous therapy like RNS generation, although 
the picomolar–nanomolar concentration of NO is found to 
effectively disperse the bacterial biofilm, the use of gaseous 
NO or exogenous NO donor might be clinically challenging 
by the potential cytotoxicity from their systemic exposure 
and unspecific targeting in case of in vivo infections.[4] In the 
myriad of multimodal nanosystems generating light-driven 
release of multiple agents at the same infectious site, the 
mechanistic understanding on their spatial distribution and 
temporal dynamics of combination therapy agents and their 
final dosage at the biosite is seldom reported. On the wake of 
dearth of sufficient understanding on the underlying mecha-
nism of multimodal action at the in vivo level, translation of 
new generation light driven nanosystems are far from clini-
cal trials and further regulatory approvals.
6)	 Certain FDA-approved nanomedicines are being used, while 
certain candidates are in clinical trials. However, these approved 
nanomedicines are mostly polymeric, liposomal, and nanocrys-
tal formulations. A recent trend is to develop a variety of inor-
ganic multi-functional materials for theranostics, apart from 
other nanomaterials derived from micelles, protein-based NPs 
for treating various disease states. Unfortunately, many of such 
materials do not fall within the boundaries of traditional mate-
rial categories and these nanomaterials end up hampering their 
clinical potential due to the insufficiency of specific regulatory 
guidelines. Importantly, the possibility of aggregate and agglom-
erate formation upon introducing these nanomaterials into bio-
logical system into biological systems may exert unexpected toxic 
effects/risks and potentially pose a threat to human health.[142,143]
However, considering the enormous possibilities laid out by 
various new-generation inorganic nanosystems with multiple 
attractive antibacterial features, and also on the ground of the 
global threat posed by various microbial infection and novel viral 
infections in particular, it is apparent that these challenges will 
trigger a renewed interest in developing various phototherapeutic 
nanosystems including UCNPs. To accelerate those efforts while 
addressing current challenges in UCNPs for aPDT, a combined 
inter-disciplinary effort between material science, photochem-
istry, photophysics, and photobiology research is needed.
Acknowledgements
A.D. acknowledges SERB (India) Grants (CRG/2020/000492 and 
JCB/2017/000004) and DBT Grant (BT/PR22251/NNT/28/1274/2017) for 
supporting this research. N.K. acknowledges SRA-CSIR scientist pool 
scheme (13/9144-A/2020-pool).
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Author Contributions
N.K. and S.K.P. conducted the literature search and A.D. supervised. All 
authors conceptualized, discussed, and wrote the manuscript.
Keywords
antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, biocompatibility, biosafety, lanthanide 
upconversion nanoparticles
Received: May 11, 2021
Revised: June 13, 2021
Published online: July 22, 2021
[1]	 X. Li, H. Bai, Y. Yang, J. Yoon, S. Wang, X. Zhang, Adv. Mater. 2019, 
31, 1805092.
[2]	 B.  Kischkel, S. A.  Rossi, S. R.  dos Santos Junior, J. D.  Nosanchuk, 
L. R. Travassos, C. P. Taborda, Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2020, 10, 463.
[3]	 G.  Chauhan, M. J.  Madou, S.  Kalra, V.  Chopra, D.  Ghosh, 
S. O. Martinez-Chapa, ACS Nano 2020, 14, 7760.
[4]	 H.  Koo, R. N.  Allan, R. P.  Howlin, P.  Stoodley, L.  Hall-Stoodley, 
Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2017, 15, 740.
[5]	 G. Taubes, Science 2008, 321, 356.
[6]	 T. B. Nielsen, E. P. Brass, D. N. Gilbert, J. G. Bartlett, B. Spellberg, 
N. Engl. J. Med. 2019, 381, 503.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480
 16163028, 2021, 43, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202104480 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2104480  (19 of 21)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
[7]	 J. A.  Ayukekbong, M.  Ntemgwa, A. N.  Atabe, Antimicrob. Resist. 
Infect. Control 2017, 6, 47.
[8]	 M. Lakemeyer, W. Zhao, F. A. Mandl, P. Hammann, S. A. Sieber, 
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2018, 57, 14440.
[9]	 S. J.  Baker, D. J.  Payne, R.  Rappuoli, E.  De Gregorio, Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 2018, 115, 12887.
[10]	 M. C. Fisher, N. J. Hawkins, D. Sanglard, S. J. Gurr, Science 2018, 
360, 739.
[11]	 C.  Weiss, M.  Carriere, L.  Fusco, I.  Capua, J. A.  Regla-Nava, 
M.  Pasquali, J. A.  Scott, F.  Vitale, M. A.  Unal, C.  Mattevi, ACS 
Nano 2020, 14, 6383.
[12]	 D. E. Bloom, S. Black, D. Salisbury, R. Rappuoli, Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA 2018, 115, 12868.
[13]	 R. K. Guy, R. S. DiPaola, F. Romanelli, R. E. Dutch, Science 2020, 
368, 829.
[14]	 A. Gupta, S. Mumtaz, C.-H. Li, I. Hussain, V. M. Rotello, Chem. 
Soc. Rev. 2019, 48, 415.
[15]	 Y.  Liu, L.  Shi, L.  Su, H. C.  van der  Mei, P. C.  Jutte, Y.  Ren, 
H. J. Busscher, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2019, 48, 428.
[16]	 Z.  Jin, X.  Du, Y.  Xu, Y.  Deng, M.  Liu, Y.  Zhao, B.  Zhang, X.  Li, 
L. Zhang, C. Peng, Nature 2020, 582, 289.
[17]	 M. Karimi, A. Ghasemi, P. S. Zangabad, R. Rahighi, S. M. M. Basri, 
H. Mirshekari, M. Amiri, Z. S. Pishabad, A. Aslani, M. Bozorgomid, 
Chem. Soc. Rev. 2016, 45, 1457.
[18]	 Y. Qiao, J. Wan, L. Zhou, W. Ma, Y. Yang, W. Luo, Z. Yu, H. Wang, 
Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. 2019, 11, e1527.
[19]	 M. W. Tibbitt, J. E. Dahlman, R. Langer, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 
138, 704.
[20]	 A. Fraix, N. Kandoth, S. Sortino, Photochemistry 2013, 41, 302.
[21]	 S.  Swaminathan, J.  Garcia-Amorós, A.  Fraix, N.  Kandoth, 
S. Sortino, F. M. Raymo, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2014, 43, 4167.
[22]	 N.  Kandoth, J.  Mosinger, R.  Gref, S.  Sortino, J. Mater. Chem. B 
2013, 1, 3458.
[23]	 D.  Şen Karaman, U. K.  Ercan, E.  Bakay, N.  Topaloğlu, 
J. M. Rosenholm, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2020, 30, 1908783.
[24]	 F.  Cieplik, D.  Deng, W.  Crielaard, W.  Buchalla, E.  Hellwig, 
A. Al-Ahmad, T. Maisch, Crit. Rev. Microbiol. 2018, 44, 571.
[25]	 F. Vatansever, W. C. de Melo, P. Avci, D. Vecchio, M. Sadasivam, 
A. Gupta, R. Chandran, M. Karimi, N. A. Parizotto, R. Yin, FEMS 
Microbiol. Rev. 2013, 37, 955.
[26]	 M. S.  Baptista, J.  Cadet, P.  Di Mascio, A. A.  Ghogare, A.  Greer, 
M. R.  Hamblin, C.  Lorente, S. C.  Nunez, M. S.  Ribeiro, 
A. H. Thomas, Photochem. Photobiol. 2017, 93, 912.
[27]	 M. Karimi, P. Sahandi Zangabad, S. Baghaee-Ravari, M. Ghazadeh, 
H. Mirshekari, M. R. Hamblin, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139, 4584.
[28]	 L.  Huang, Y.  Xuan, Y.  Koide, T.  Zhiyentayev, M.  Tanaka, 
M. R. Hamblin, Lasers Surg. Med. 2012, 44, 490.
[29]	 V.  Balzani, P.  Ceroni, A.  Juris, Photochemistry and Photophysics: 
Concepts, Research, Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ 
2014.
[30]	 A.  Terenzi, L.  Salassa, in Photoactive Inorganic Nanoparticles, (Eds: 
J. P. Prieto, M. G. Béjar), Elsevier, Amsterdam, Netherlands 2019, 
p. 43.
[31]	 P. C. Ray, S. A. Khan, A. K. Singh, D. Senapati, Z. Fan, Chem. Soc. 
Rev. 2012, 41, 3193.
[32]	 F. Auzel, Chem. Rev. 2004, 104, 139.
[33]	 F.  Zhang, Photon Upconversion Nanomaterials, Vol. 416, Springer, 
Berlin, Germany 2015.
[34]	 T. N.  Singh-Rachford, F. N.  Castellano, Coord. Chem. Rev. 2010, 
254, 2560.
[35]	 N.  Harada, Y.  Sasaki, M.  Hosoyamada, N.  Kimizuka, N.  Yanai, 
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2021, 60, 142.
[36]	 W. Fan, W. Bu, J. Shi, Adv. Mater. 2016, 28, 3987.
[37]	 Z. Wang, Q. Han, X. Zhao, X. Xie, Z. Wang, J. Lin, B. Xing, J. Con­
trolled Release 2020, 324, 104.
[38]	 Y. Pan, J. Yang, X. Luan, X. Liu, X. Li, J. Yang, T. Huang, L. Sun, 
Y. Wang, Y. Lin, Y. Song, Sci. Adv. 2019, 5, eaav7199.
[39]	 K. Deisseroth, Nat. Neurosci. 2015, 18, 1213.
[40]	 K. Zhang, B. Cui, Trends Biotechnol. 2015, 33, 92.
[41]	 S.  Shah, J.-J.  Liu, N.  Pasquale, J.  Lai, H.  McGowan, Z. P.  Pang, 
K.-B. Lee, Nanoscale 2015, 7, 16571.
[42]	 A. H.  All, X.  Zeng, D. B. L.  Teh, Z.  Yi, A.  Prasad, T.  Ishizuka, 
N. Thakor, Y. Hiromu, X. Liu, Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1803474.
[43]	 H.  Kang, K.  Zhang, Q.  Pan, S.  Lin, D. S. H.  Wong, J.  Li, 
W. Y. W. Lee, B. Yang, F. Han, G. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2018, 28, 
1802642.
[44]	 X.  Ai, L.  Lyu, Y.  Zhang, Y.  Tang, J.  Mu, F.  Liu, Y.  Zhou, Z.  Zuo, 
G. Liu, B. Xing, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2017, 56, 3031.
[45]	 Y. Zhang, W. Zhang, K. Zeng, Y. Ao, M. Wang, Z. Yu, F. Qi, W. Yu, 
H. Mao, L. Tao, Small 2020, 16, 1906797.
[46]	 M. Safdar, A. Ghazy, M. Lastusaari, M. Karppinen, J. Mater. Chem. 
C 2020, 8, 6946.
[47]	 L. Sun, R. Wei, J. Feng, H. Zhang, Coord. Chem. Rev. 2018, 364, 10.
[48]	 Y.  Feng, L.  Liu, J.  Zhang, H.  Aslan, M.  Dong, J. Mater. Chem. B 
2017, 5, 8631.
[49]	 M. Haase, H. Schäfer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2011, 50, 5808.
[50]	 H. H. Gorris, O. S. Wolfbeis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2013, 52, 3584.
[51]	 S. Wilhelm, ACS Nano 2017, 11, 10644.
[52]	 S. Wen, J. Zhou, K. Zheng, A. Bednarkiewicz, X. Liu, D. Jin, Nat. 
Commun. 2018, 9, 2415.
[53]	 R. S. Liu, Phosphors, Up Conversion Nano Particles, Quantum Dots 
and Their Applications, Vol. 1, Springer, Berlin, Germany 2016.
[54]	 M.  Wang, G.  Abbineni, A.  Clevenger, C.  Mao, S.  Xu, Nanomed.: 
Nanotechnol., Biol., Med. 2011, 7, 710.
[55]	 K. W.  Krämer, D.  Biner, G.  Frei, H. U.  Güdel, M. P.  Hehlen, 
S. R. Lüthi, Chem. Mater. 2004, 16, 1244.
[56]	 H. Dong, L.-D. Sun, C.-H. Yan, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2015, 44, 1608.
[57]	 G. Chen, H. Qiu, P. N. Prasad, X. Chen, Chem. Rev. 2014, 114, 5161.
[58]	 F. Auzel, J. Lumin. 1990, 45, 341.
[59]	 F. Wang, X. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2009, 38, 976.
[60]	 F.  Wang, R.  Deng, J.  Wang, Q.  Wang, Y.  Han, H.  Zhu, X.  Chen, 
X. Liu, Nat. Mater. 2011, 10, 968.
[61]	 Y.-F. Wang, G.-Y. Liu, L.-D. Sun, J.-W. Xiao, J.-C. Zhou, C.-H. Yan, 
ACS Nano 2013, 7, 7200.
[62]	 X. Xie, N. Gao, R. Deng, Q. Sun, Q.-H. Xu, X. Liu, J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 2013, 135, 12608.
[63]	 H. Wen, H. Zhu, X. Chen, T. F. Hung, B. Wang, G. Zhu, S. F. Yu, 
F. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2013, 52, 13419.
[64]	 W. Zheng, P. Huang, D. Tu, E. Ma, H. Zhu, X. Chen, Chem. Soc. 
Rev. 2015, 44, 1379.
[65]	 N. Bogdan, F. Vetrone, G. A. Ozin, J. A. Capobianco, Nano Lett. 
2011, 11, 835.
[66]	 V.  Poláchová, M.  Pastucha, Z.  Mikušová, M. J.  Mickert, 
A. Hlaváček, H. H. Gorris, P. Skládal, Z. Farka, Nanoscale 2019, 11, 
8343.
[67]	 L. C.  Ong, L. Y.  Ang, S.  Alonso, Y.  Zhang, Biomaterials 2014, 35, 
2987.
[68]	 C.  Yao, C.  Wei, Z.  Huang, Y.  Lu, A. M.  El-Toni, D.  Ju, X.  Zhang, 
W. Wang, F. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2016, 8, 6935.
[69]	 S. Wu, N. Duan, Z. Shi, C. Fang, Z. Wang, Anal. Chem. 2014, 86, 
3100.
[70]	 M.  del  Barrio, S.  de  Marcos, V.  Cebolla, J.  Heiland, S.  Wilhelm, 
T. Hirsch, J. Galbán, Biosens. Bioelectron. 2014, 59, 14.
[71]	 Y.  Wang, Y.  Yang, Y.  Shi, H.  Song, C.  Yu, Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 
1904106.
[72]	 L.  Hobley, C.  Harkins, C. E.  MacPhee, N. R.  Stanley-Wall, FEMS 
Microbiol. Rev. 2015, 39, 649.
[73]	 A.  Panáček, L.  Kvítek, M.  Smékalová, R.  Večeřová, M.  Kolář, 
M.  Röderová, F.  Dyčka, M.  Šebela, R.  Prucek, O.  Tomanec, Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 2018, 13, 65.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480
 16163028, 2021, 43, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202104480 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2104480  (20 of 21)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
[74]	 J. Guo, S.-H. Gao, J. Lu, P. L. Bond, W. Verstraete, Z. Yuan, ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 22298.
[75]	 M.  Yin, Z.  Li, E.  Ju, Z.  Wang, K.  Dong, J.  Ren, X.  Qu, Chem. 
Commun. 2014, 50, 10488.
[76]	 M. 
C. 
Grüner, 
M. 
S. 
Arai, 
M. 
Carreira, 
N. 
Inada, 
A. S. S. de Camargo, ACS Appl. Bio Mater. 2018, 1, 1028.
[77]	 W. Liu, Y. Zhang, W. You, J. Su, S. Yu, T. Dai, Y. Huang, X. Chen, 
X. Song, Z. Chen, Nanoscale 2020, 12, 13948.
[78]	 S. Li, S. Cui, D. Yin, Q. Zhu, Y. Ma, Z. Qian, Y. Gu, Nanoscale 2017, 
9, 3912.
[79]	 J. Liu, M. Yu, G. Zeng, J. Cao, Y. Wang, T. Ding, X. Yang, K. Sun, 
J. Parvizi, S. Tian, J. Mater. Chem. B 2018, 6, 7854.
[80]	 K. Zhou, X. Qiu, L. Xu, G. Li, B. Rao, B. Guo, D. Pei, A. Li, G. He, 
ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12, 26432.
[81]	 M. Sun, A. Qu, C. Hao, X. Wu, L. Xu, C. Xu, H. Kuang, Adv. Mater. 
2018, 30, 1804241.
[82]	 I. Kolodkin-Gal, D. Romero, S. Cao, J. Clardy, R. Kolter, R. Losick, 
Science 2010, 328, 627.
[83]	 W. Wei, W. Bing, J. Ren, X. Qu, Chem. Commun. 2015, 51, 12677.
[84]	 N. Liu, Y. Xu, S. Hossain, N. Huang, D. Coursolle, J. A. Gralnick, 
E. M. Boon, Biochemistry 2012, 51, 2087.
[85]	 N. Barraud, B. G. Kardak, N. R. Yepuri, R. P. Howlin, J. S. Webb, 
S. N. Faust, S. Kjelleberg, S. A. Rice, M. J. Kelso, Angew. Chem., 
Int. Ed. 2012, 51, 9057.
[86]	 K. Dong, E. Ju, N. Gao, Z. Wang, J. Ren, X. Qu, Chem. Commun. 
2016, 52, 5312.
[87]	 U.  Rocha, K. U.  Kumar, C.  Jacinto, I.  Villa, F.  Sanz-Rodríguez, 
M.  del  Carmen Iglesias de la Cruz, A.  Juarranz, E.  Carrasco, 
F. C. J. M. van Veggel, E. Bovero, J. G. Solé, D. Jaque, Small 2014, 
10, 1141.
[88]	 F. Xu, Y. Zhao, M. Hu, P. Zhang, N. Kong, R. Liu, C. Liu, S. K. Choi, 
Chem. Commun. 2018, 54, 9525.
[89]	 J. Xu, P. Yang, M. Sun, H. Bi, B. Liu, D. Yang, S. Gai, F. He, J. Lin, 
ACS Nano 2017, 11, 4133.
[90]	 F. Xu, M. Hu, C. Liu, S. K. Choi, Biomater. Sci. 2017, 5, 678.
[91]	 S.  Shen, X.  Guo, L.  Wu, M.  Wang, X.  Wang, F.  Kong, H.  Shen, 
M. Xie, Y. Ge, Y. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. B 2014, 2, 5775.
[92]	 Y.  Zhao, M.  Hu, Y.  Zhang, J.  Liu, C.  Liu, S. K.  Choi, Z.  Zhang, 
L. Song, Chem. Eng. J. 2020, 385, 123980.
[93]	 B. König, Chemical Photocatalysis, Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co 
KG, Berlin, Germany 2020.
[94]	 C. R. Stephenson, T. P. Yoon, D. W. MacMillan, Visible Light Photo­
catalysis in Organic Chemistry, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ 2018.
[95]	 X. Zhang, G. Tian, W. Yin, L. Wang, X. Zheng, L. Yan, J. Li, H. Su, 
C. Chen, Z. Gu, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2015, 25, 3049.
[96]	 Y. Nosaka, A. Y. Nosaka, Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 11302.
[97]	 J.  Xu, N.  Liu, D.  Wu, Z.  Gao, Y.-Y.  Song, P.  Schmuki, ACS Nano 
2019, 14, 337.
[98]	 Z. Nie, X. Ke, D. Li, Y. Zhao, L. Zhu, R. Qiao, X. L. Zhang, J. Phys. 
Chem. C 2019, 123, 22959.
[99]	 J. Sun, P. Zhang, Y. Fan, J. Zhao, S. Niu, L. Song, L. Ma, L. Ren, 
W. Ming, Mater. Sci. Eng. C 2019, 103, 109797.
[100]	 J. Sun, L. Song, Y. Fan, L. Tian, S. Luan, S. Niu, L. Ren, W. Ming, 
J. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2019, 11, 26581.
[101]	 W. Li, K. Dong, H. Wang, P. Zhang, Y. Sang, J. Ren, X. Qu, Bioma­
terials 2019, 217, 119310.
[102]	 Stop Neglecting Fungi, Nat. Microbiol. 2017, 2, 17120.
[103]	 H.  Yang, J.  Tong, C. W.  Lee, S.  Ha, S. H.  Eom, Y. J.  Im, Nat. 
Commun. 2015, 6, 6129.
[104]	 S. Khan, F. Alam, A. Azam, A. U. Khan, Int. J. Nanomed. 2012, 7, 3245.
[105]	 L. M. Baltazar, A. Ray, D. A. Santos, P. S. Cisalpino, A. J. Friedman, 
J. D. Nosanchuk, Front. Microbiol. 2015, 6, 202.
[106]	 Y. Zhang, P. Huang, D. Wang, J. Chen, W. Liu, P. Hu, M. Huang, 
X. Chen, Z. Chen, Nanoscale 2018, 10, 15485.
[107]	 T. A. Tabish, M. R. Hamblin, Nano Today 2020, 35, 100962.
[108]	 D. Lembo, M. Donalisio, A. Civra, M. Argenziano, R. Cavalli, Expert 
Opin. Drug Delivery 2018, 15, 93.
[109]	 M.  Siccardi, P.  Martin, T. O.  McDonald, N. J.  Liptrott, 
M. Giardiello, S. Rannard, A. Owen, Ther. Delivery 2013, 4, 153.
[110]	 A. Wiehe, J. M. O’Brien, M. O. Senge, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 
2019, 18, 2565.
[111]	 M. Wainwright, Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 2003, 21, 510.
[112]	 L. Costa, M. A. F. Faustino, M. G. P. Neves, Â. Cunha, A. Almeida, 
Viruses 2012, 4, 1034.
[113]	 M. E. Lim, Y.-l. Lee, Y. Zhang, J. J. H. Chu, Biomaterials 2012, 33, 1912.
[114]	 Y. Sun, W. Feng, P. Yang, C. Huang, F. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2015, 44, 1509.
[115]	 A. Gnach, T. Lipinski, A. Bednarkiewicz, J. Rybka, J. A. Capobianco, 
Chem. Soc. Rev. 2015, 44, 1561.
[116]	 H. Hu, M. Yu, F. Li, Z. Chen, X. Gao, L. Xiong, C. Huang, Chem. 
Mater. 2008, 20, 7003.
[117]	 A. Gulzar, J. Xu, P. Yang, F. He, L. Xu, Nanoscale 2017, 9, 12248.
[118]	 T.-K.  Nguyen, R.  Selvanayagam, K. K.  Ho, R.  Chen, S. K.  Kutty, 
S. A. Rice, N. Kumar, N. Barraud, H. T. Duong, C. Boyer, Chem. 
Sci. 2016, 7, 1016.
[119]	 H. Li, X. Wang, D. Huang, G. Chen, Nanotechnology 2019, 31, 072001.
[120]	 L.  Xiong, T.  Yang, Y.  Yang, C.  Xu, F.  Li, Biomaterials 2010, 31, 
7078.
[121]	 M. Zhao, R. Wang, B. Li, Y. Fan, Y. Wu, X. Zhu, F. Zhang, Angew. 
Chem., Int. Ed. 2019, 58, 2050.
[122]	 M.  Zhou, X.  Ge, D.-M.  Ke, H.  Tang, J.-Z.  Zhang, M.  Calvaresi, 
B. Gao, L. Sun, Q. Su, H. Wang, Front. Chem. 2019, 7, 218.
[123]	 T. Moriarty, D. Grainger, R. Richards, Eur. Cells Mater. 2014, 28, 112.
[124]	 A. P.  West, I. E.  Brodsky, C.  Rahner, D. K.  Woo, H.  Erdjument-
Bromage, P. Tempst, M. C. Walsh, Y. Choi, G. S. Shadel, S. Ghosh, 
Nature 2011, 472, 476.
[125]	 I. Kolodkin-Gal, H. Engelberg-Kulka, J. Bacteriol. 2008, 190, 3169.
[126]	 S. S. Grant, D. T. Hung, Virulence 2013, 4, 273.
[127]	 Y. Huang, J. Ren, X. Qu, Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 4357.
[128]	 Z. Tang, P. Zhao, H. Wang, Y. Liu, W. Bu, Chem. Rev. 2021, 121, 1981.
[129]	 M. E. de Kraker, A. J. Stewardson, S. Harbarth, PLoS Med. 2016, 13, 
e1002184.
[130]	 C.  Homann, L.  Krukewitt, F.  Frenzel, B.  Grauel, C.  Würth, 
U. Resch-Genger, M. Haase, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2018, 57, 8765.
[131]	 X.  Wang, R. R.  Valiev, T. Y.  Ohulchanskyy, H.  Ågren, C.  Yang, 
G. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2017, 46, 4150.
[132]	 X. Wu, Y. Zhang, K. Takle, O. Bilsel, Z. Li, H. Lee, Z. Zhang, D. Li, 
W. Fan, C. Duan, ACS Nano 2016, 10, 1060.
[133]	 Z. Yi, Z. Luo, X. Qin, Q. Chen, X. Liu, Acc. Chem. Res. 2020, 53, 2692.
[134]	 M. S.  Meijer, P. A.  Rojas-Gutierrez, D.  Busko, I. A.  Howard, 
F. Frenzel, C. Würth, U. Resch-Genger, B. S. Richards, A. Turshatov, 
J. A. Capobianco, S. Bonnet, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2018, 20, 22556.
[135]	 S. K. Pramanik, S. Sreedharan, H. Singh, N. H. Green, C. Smythe, 
J. A. Thomas, A. Das, Chem. Commun. 2017, 53, 12672.
[136]	 S. Sreedharan, R. Tiwari, D. Tyde, S. O. Aderinto, S. K. Pramanik, 
A. Das, J. A. Thomas, Mater. Chem. Front. 2021, 5, 1268.
[137]	 H.  Singh, S.  Sreedharan, K.  Tiwari, N. H.  Green, C.  Smythe, 
S. K. Pramanik, J. A. Thomas, A. Das, Chem. Commun. 2019, 55, 521.
[138]	 H. Singh, S. Sreedharan, E. Oyarzabal, T. S. Mahapatra, N. Green, 
Y.-Y. I. Shih, M. Das, J. A. Thomas, S. K. Pramanik, A. Das, Chem. 
Commun. 2020, 56, 7945.
[139]	 H.  Singh, S.  Sreedharan, R.  Tiwari, C.  Walther, C.  Smythe, 
S. K. Pramanik, J. A. Thomas, A. Das, Cryst. Growth Des. 2018, 18, 7199.
[140]	 D. M. A.  Vera, M. H.  Haynes, A. R.  Ball, T.  Dai, C.  Astrakas, 
M. J.  Kelso, M. R.  Hamblin, G. P.  Tegos, Photochem. Photobiol. 
2012, 88, 499.
[141]	 S. K.  Sharma, P.  Mroz, T.  Dai, Y. Y.  Huang, T. G. S.  Denis, 
M. R. Hamblin, Isr. J. Chem. 2012, 52, 691.
[142]	 M. G. Wacker, A. Proykova, G. M. L. Santos, Int. J. Pharm. 2016, 509, 95.
[143]	 D.  Bobo, K. J.  Robinson, J.  Islam, K. J.  Thurecht, S. R.  Corrie, 
Pharm. Res. 2016, 33, 2373.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480
 16163028, 2021, 43, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202104480 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2104480  (21 of 21)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
Noufal Kandoth received his Ph.D. in Photochemistry from the University of Catania, Italy, under 
the supervision of Prof. Salvatore Sortino (2013). He did his postdoctoral research at ISOF-CNR 
Bologna, Italy and ICIQ, Tarragona, Spain in DNA sensing and photoredox catalysis. Currently, he 
is working at Indian Institute of Science and Educational Research-IISER, Kolkata, India, as senior 
research associate under CSIR-Scientist pool scheme. His research at IISER Kolkata is concerned 
with photodynamic therapy against microbial infections and tumors.
Sumit Kumar Pramanik is a senior scientist at CSIR-Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research 
Institute. He received his B.Sc. degree from Vidyasagar University in 2005, and his Master’s 
degree from Bengal Engineering and Science University, Shibpur in 2007. He obtained his Ph.D. 
degree from CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata in 2013. His current research is 
focused on novel nanostructured material for application in bioimaging, drug delivery, sensing, 
and optoelectronics.
Amitava Das is a professor at the Department of Chemical Sciences and the Center for Advanced 
Functional Material at the Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER) Kolkata. 
Before this, he was the Director of CSIR-Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute 
during 2016–2019. He is an elected fellow of three major National Academies of India and the 
recipient of the SERB-J.C. Bose National Fellowship. His current research interests include mole-
cular recognition, imaging of potential biomarkers, and stimuli-responsive nanostructured mate-
rial for target-specific drug release.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2104480
 16163028, 2021, 43, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202104480 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [22/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License