Photothermal-enhanced silver nanocluster bioactive glass hydrogels for 
synergistic antimicrobial and promote wound healing
Fuqiang Song a,c,d, Anqi Ye a,c, Linyuan Jiang a,c, Yang Lu c, Yanzhen Feng c, Rong Huang a,c,  
Siting Du c, Xiaoyu Dong c, Ting Huang c, Ping Li c, Liangliang Yang a,d, Jinjing Zhang a,**,  
Mengjia Xu b,***, Li Cheng a,****, Jian Xiao c,d,*
a Affiliated Cixi Hospital, Cixi Biomedical Research Institute, Wenzhou Medical University, Ningbo, 315300, China
b Ningbo Key Laboratory of Biomedical Imaging Probe Materials and Technology, Zhejiang International Cooperation Base of Biomedical Materials Technology and 
Application, Ningbo Cixi Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Laboratory of Advanced Theranostic Materials and Technology, Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology 
and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo 315201, China
c Department of Wound Healing, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang, 325035, China
d Oujiang Laboratory (Zhejiang Lab for Regenerative Medicine, Vision and Brain Health), School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 
Zhejiang, 325035, China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Photothermal antibacterial
Silver nanohybrids
Antibacterial hydrogels
Polydopamine-coated bioactive glass
Wound healing
A B S T R A C T
Antibacterial hydrogels are promising for combating infections and promoting wound healing. Nevertheless, 
excessive antibiotics induce resistance, and high metal ion levels cause cytotoxicity, complicating healing. Here, 
we introduce a hydrogel incorporating polydopamine-coated bioactive glass (BGs@PDA) on reduced graphene 
oxide (rGO) with photothermal therapy (PTT) and silver nanoclusters (AgNCs) for synergistic antibacterial 
treatment. This design enables rapid bacterial eradication and controlled release. Near-infrared-assisted heating 
provides noninvasive, targeted hyperthermia, killing bacteria quickly. Post-PTT addition of low-dose AgNCs 
reduces toxicity while enhancing antimicrobial efficacy and biocompatibility. BGs@PDA-loaded rGO prevents 
sedimentation, improves photothermal conversion and conductivity, and stabilizes the hydrogel structure. 
Constructed from chitosan and hydroxyethyl cellulose, the hydrogel is cross-linked by PDA and rGO, enhancing 
mechanical strength, adhesion, self-healing, free radical scavenging, and continuous wound exudate absorption. 
PDA encapsulation facilitates BGs degradation, improving the wound microenvironment. In vivo studies confirm 
accelerated healing and potent synergistic antibacterial effects, indicating its potential as a low-dose, antibiotic- 
free alternative for clinical wound infection management.
1. Introduction
As the body’s main protective barrier, the skin is continually exposed 
to external conditions, rendering it highly vulnerable to both physical 
and chemical harm [1,2]. The process of wound healing generally in­
volves four interrelated stages: hemostasis, inflammation, proliferation, 
and tissue remodeling. These phases collaborate to reestablish the pro­
tective barrier [3,4]. When a large wound is untreated or exposed to air 
for an extended period, the moist micro-environment at the wound site 
inevitably leads to bacterial infection [5,6]. Various wound dressings, 
including foams [7], nanofibers [8,9], sponges [10,11], and hydrogels 
[12] have been developed to address this problem. Among these, 
hydrogels are particularly promising due to their three-dimensional 
network structure that mimics the extracellular matrix, high absorp­
tivity for wound exudates, significant moisture retention, oxygen 
permeability, and flexible shape adaptability for drug delivery [3,4,13,
* Corresponding author. Affiliated Cixi Hospital, Cixi Biomedical Research Institute, Wenzhou Medical University, Ningbo, 315300, China.
** Corresponding author. Affiliated Cixi Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Cixi, 315300, China.
*** Corresponding author. Ningbo Key Laboratory of Biomedical Imaging Probe Materials and Technology, Zhejiang International Cooperation Base of Biomedical 
Materials Technology and Application, Ningbo Cixi Institute of Biomedical Engineering, Laboratory of Advanced Theranostic Materials and Technology, Ningbo 
Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Ningbo 315201, China.
**** Corresponding author. Affiliated Cixi Hospital, Wenzhou Medical University, Cixi, 315300, China.
E-mail addresses: zjinjing_39@126.com (J. Zhang), xumengjia@nimte.ac.cn (M. Xu), 13486450777@163.com (L. Cheng), xfxj2000@126.com (J. Xiao). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Materials Today Bio
journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/materials-today-bio
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2024.101439
Received 28 October 2024; Received in revised form 15 December 2024; Accepted 30 December 2024  
Materials Today Bio 30 (2025) 101439 
Available online 31 December 2024 
2590-0064/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by- 
nc-nd/4.0/ ). 

14]. Antibiotics-free antimicrobial functionalized hydrogels have 
garnered significant interest because the common clinical use of anti­
biotics often results in drug resistance [15,16]. Therefore, developing 
innovative therapeutic technologies to combat bacterial infections and 
enhance the wound healing process is of paramount importance.
Compared to traditional antimicrobial therapies, photothermal 
therapy (PTT) mediated hydrogels reduce antibiotic overuse by con­
verting light energy into heat via photothermal agents that effectively 
kill bacteria [17–19]. In addition, PTT has several advantages in wound 
repair, including the absence of spatial limitations, high tissue pene­
tration, and non-invasive application [20–22]. While PTT effectively 
eliminates most bacteria through temperature-responsive properties, it 
does not provide long-term, slow-release sterilization during wound 
healing [23,24]. Ag nanomaterials possess potent antibacterial proper­
ties by releasing Ag ions and generating reactive oxygen species. Silver 
nanoclusters (AgNCs) are smaller and safer than traditional silver 
nanoparticles, offering significant antimicrobial effects and unique 
fluorescence imaging capabilities for non-invasive, real-time wound 
healing monitoring [25,26]. However, AgNCs tend to agglomerate 
during synthesis and require stabilizers for dispersion. While proteins 
and peptides are common stabilizers, they can result in larger particle 
sizes [26,27]. On the contrary, as a natural polysaccharide chitosan (CS) 
with excellent biosafety and degradability, it can be used as an ideal 
stabilizer to produce AgNCs with controllable particle size, enabling the 
development of novel core-shell hybrid materials [27,28].
Bioactive glass (BGs), a widely adopted biomaterial in tissue repair, 
has shown significant potential in promoting wound healing [29,30]. 
BGs are usually in contact with body fluids for degradation, and 
hydrogels can continuously absorb wound exudate, making them ideal 
carriers for BGs and providing a better environment for their degrada­
tion. However, their degradation is still slow, which can lead to pro­
longed contact with skin tissue and trigger an inflammatory response. 
Polydopamine (PDA), a photothermal agent in PTT, is synthesized 
through the oxidative self-polymerization of dopamine. Its abundant 
Scheme 1. Schematic illustration of formation and application of rGO/BGs@PDA loaded CS-HEC/AgNCs hydrogel for wound healing. (A) Synthesis of BGs. (B) 
Synthesis illustration of BGs@PDA and loaded on GO (rGO/BGs@PDA). (C) Synthesis of chitosan stabilized AgNCs. (D) Characteristics of hydrogels as well as local 
enlargements of composition (I) and the detailed crosslinking between the individual components (II). (E) Diagram of the mechanism of the hydrogel in 
wound healing.
F. Song et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Materials Today Bio 30 (2025) 101439 
2 

catechol structure enhances hydrogel adhesion by forming hydrogen 
bonds with water molecules [31]. Due to its inherent excellent 
biocompatibility, antioxidant and antimicrobial properties, coupled 
with its unique catechol structure, PDA can be used not only as a pho­
tothermal agent in PTT, but also extensively in biomaterials as a 
bio-coating that can be used with negligible cytotoxicity. In addition, 
encapsulation of BGs with PDA can effectively regulate the degradation 
rate of BGs, reduce the accumulation of residual materials, and improve 
the cellular interface, thus minimizing cytotoxicity [32–34]. Previous 
studies have indicated that the multiple physiological functions of BGs 
are closely related to their conversion into hydroxyapatite-like struc­
tures, a process significantly facilitated by PDA coating [6]. However, 
our preliminary results revealed that PDA-coated BGs (BGs@PDA) ten­
ded to deposit before gelling, leading to inhomogeneous gelation due to 
their larger particle size. Introducing graphene oxide (GO) provides a 
promising solution. GO, rich in oxygen-containing functional groups 
such as epoxides and carboxyl groups, can engage in redox reactions 
with PDA. This interaction facilitates the loading of BGs@PDA onto GO, 
resulting in rGO/BGs@PDA during oxidation [35,36]. This GO inte­
grated strategy offers a novel method for delivering large sedimentable 
bioactive materials with higher homogeneity and a superior photo­
thermal conversion capability compared to PDA. As a natural poly­
saccharide, chitosan not only serves as a stabilizer for reducing AgNCs 
but also, due to its amino and hydroxyl functional groups, can form 
physical or chemical bonds with PDA, GO, and H2O. This makes it 
widely used in hydrogel drug delivery systems [37–39]. However, the 
use of single-component chitosan hydrogels is limited in promoting skin 
wound healing due to their inherently low mechanical strength [39,40]. 
In contrast, as a non-ionic water-soluble polymer, hydroxyethyl cellu­
lose (HEC) can significantly enhance the mechanical strength and 
toughness of hydrogels [41]. HEC also enhances interactions between 
polymer chains, which remain stable at elevated temperatures, thus 
boosting the thermal stability crucial for photothermal hydrogels [42,
43]. As shown in Scheme 1, during hydrogel formation, PDA can form 
Schiff base bonds with CS. The abundant hydroxyl groups in both PDA 
and HEC facilitate hydrogen bonding, enhancing the mechanical 
strength and adhesion properties of the hydrogels [42,44]. The quinone 
groups in PDA can interact through redox reactions with the epoxy and 
hydroxyl groups on GO’s surface, resulting in a more stable structure. 
Additionally, hydrogen bonds can also form between the hydroxyl and 
amine groups in PDA and the hydroxyl and carboxyl groups on 
reduced-rGO [45]. The aromatic groups in PDA can stack with the ar­
omatic carbon ring of rGO through π–π interactions [36,46]. The in­
teractions between these components are responsible for the 
improvement and maintenance of the mechanical strength and stability 
of the hydrogel.
In summary, this study designed multifunctional BGs-loaded pho­
tohydrothermal hydrogels with enhanced antibacterial efficiency for 
wound healing applications. The combined effect of PTT and AgNCs 
successfully prevents bacterial growth and treats wound infections. 
Leveraging the redox properties of PDA and GO, BGs@PDA were uni­
formly loaded onto rGO via chemical bonds, ensuring homogeneous 
dispersion and enhancing GO’s conductivity. The introduction of rGO 
significantly improved the photothermal conversion efficiency of the 
hydrogel, enabling rapid temperature response under light exposure and 
enhancing its antibacterial effect. BGs@PDA not only offered essential 
structural support but also enhanced cell proliferation and tissue 
regeneration at the wound site, thereby accelerating the healing process. 
Overall, this composite hydrogel combines the advantages of various 
functional materials, demonstrating excellent mechanical properties, 
thermal stability, biocompatibility, and antibacterial activity, and holds 
great potential for clinical wound care applications.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
Silicon dioxide (SiO2), calcium oxide (CaO), sodium oxide (Na2O), 
phosphorus pentoxide (P2O5), graphene oxide (GO), dopamine hydro­
chloride (DA), chitosan (MW: 800–1000), chitosan (deacetylated 95 %), 
hydroxyethylcellulose (low viscosity), sodium β-glycerophosphate, 2,2- 
Biphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) were purchased from Maclean’s 
(Shanghai, China). Sodium borohydride (NaBH4), Silver nitrate 
(AgNO3), ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), anhydrous ethanol, 
glutaraldehyde (GA), acetic acid (CH3COOH) were purchased from 
Sinopharm (Shanghai, China).
2.2. Synthesis of bioactive glasses
The material applied in this study was melt-derived BioGlass® 45S5 
with the following composition (wt%): 45 % SiO2, 24.5 % Na2O, 24.5 % 
CaO and 6 % P2O5. The production of 45S5 BGs was carried out by a 
melting process [47]. Specifically, the precursor raw materials were 
homogeneously mixed and then melted at high temperatures 
(>1200 ◦C) and quenched to form an amorphous glass. The desired 
bioactive glass was synthesized by drying, pulverizing, and sieving after 
cooling to room temperature.
2.3. Synthesis of silver nanoclusters
Based on previous work, silver nanoclusters were synthesized using 
CS as a stabilizer with slight modifications [27]. Briefly, 100 mg of CS 
(MW: 800–1000) and EDTA were added to 5 mL of AgNO3 (0.5 mM) 
solution and stirred until the solution was completely dissolved. NaBH4 
(1.0 mM) solution was then added to the solution and stirred adequately, 
then ethanol was added until the solution changed from clear to cloudy. 
Glutaraldehyde (25 %) was added to the solution, centrifuged after 
stirring and lyophilized.
2.4. Preparation of BGs@PDA and rGO/BGs@PDA
DA (1 g) was added to 100 mL of Tris-HCl solution and stirred at 
room temperature until the color of the solution changed from clear to 
dark brown, then BGs were added and stirred overnight to prepare 
BGs@PDA. The BGs@PDA were purified by centrifugation until the 
supernatant became clear and dried at 65 ◦C for 24h.
An aqueous solution of GO was added and dispersed by ultrasound to 
the above BGs@PDA. The IR spectra of GO and rGO/BGs@PDA were 
compared to verify whether BGs@PDA were loaded onto GO through 
redox reactions.
2.5. Synthesis of composite hydrogels
1.5 % chitosan and 0.15 % hydroxyethyl cellulose were dissolved in a 
solution containing 0.1 M acetic acid and stirred overnight. 4 mg of 
AgNCs and rGO/BGs@PDA were added to the solution and mixed well. 
Then 200 mg of sodium β-glycerophosphate was added under an ice bath 
and refrigerated.
The Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FTIR, Thermo Fisher, 
IS 50, USA) characterized the hydrogels. The morphology of the 
hydrogels was observed using SEM (FEI, QUANTA250, USA) and Micro 
CT (Skyscan1276, BRUKER, USA). For details of the procedure, see SI 
(Supplementary Information).
2.6. Injectability and gelation time
Injectability was investigated first by macroscopic observation by 
inhaling the hydrogel into a syringe and observing whether the hydrogel 
could be punched through the syringe and filled into different shapes. To 
F. Song et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Materials Today Bio 30 (2025) 101439 
3 

Fig. 1. Characterization of BGs and AgNCs. (A) Infrared spectra of BGs. (B) SEM micrographs of bioactive glass at 500x, 1000x, 2000x, and 5000× magnifications, 
with scales of 100 μm, 50 μm, 20 μm, and 10 μm, respectively. (C) Elemental mapping analysis of BGs (P in green; Ca in cyan; Si in gray; Na in yellow). (D) Particle 
size distribution of bioactive glass measured by laser diffraction. (E) UV and fluorescence spectra of AgNCs. (F) Fluorescence effect diagram of AgNCs emitted under 
300 W UV irradiation (305 nm). (G) Particle size analysis diagram of AgNCs. (H) Chitosan-coated AgNCs nano microspheres in bright field and dark field state with a 
scale bar of 50 nm. (I) The elemental mapping analysis of AgNCs reveals the distribution of C (red), Ag (blue), O (green), and N (cyan), the scale bar is 50 nm. 
Additionally, the EDX spectrum for figure H is provided.
F. Song et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Materials Today Bio 30 (2025) 101439 
4 

verify whether the hydrogel exhibits shear thinning properties, we can 
utilize a rheometer (Waters, HR-2, USA) to experiment by observing the 
changes in its viscosity as the shear rate varies from 0.01 s⁻1–1000 s⁻1.
The test tube inversion method was used to evaluate the gel forma­
tion experiments. Specifically, the hydrogel was bottled and placed in a 
37 ◦C constant temperature incubator and recorded by tilting it at a 
certain angle every 15 s for observation. The gelation process was 
considered complete when the gel solution no longer flowed within 30 s 
of turning.
Fig. 2. Characterization of BGs, BGs@PDA, rGO/BGs@PDA and hydrogels. (A) Comparison of infrared spectra of BGs, PDAs, and BGs@PDA. (B) Infrared spectra of 
BGs and BGs@PDA immersed in SBF-simulated body fluids for 3, 5, 7, 9, and 14 days. (C) Infrared spectra of GOs and BGs@PDA loaded rGO. (D) Hydrogel 
injectability analysis through a syringe. (E) Hydrogel shear-thinning rheology experiments. (F) Hydrogel formation time of different compositions. (G) Hydrogel 
inversion experiment. (H) Infrared spectra of composite hydrogel. (I) The morphological characteristics of the CS-HEC hydrogel were depicted under 50x and 200×
magnifications, with scale bars of 1 mm and 200 μm, respectively. Meanwhile, the SEM images of the rGO2/BGs@PDA4 hydrogel were presented at 50x (showing 
different regions), 200x, and 500× magnifications, with scale bars of 1 mm, 1 mm, 200 μm, and 100 μm, respectively. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
F. Song et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Materials Today Bio 30 (2025) 101439 
5 

2.7. Adhesion, stretch, self-healing properties, and mechanical strength
The adhesion, stretch, self-healing properties and mechanical 
strength of the hydrogel can be found in the SI.
2.8. Water content, swelling ratio, stability, and degradability
Detailed experimental procedures for water content, swelling ratio, 
stability, and degradability of the hydrogel are given in the SI.
2.9. DPPH radical scavenging assay and measuring electrical conductivity
Hydrogel free radical scavenging was evaluated using 2,2-biphenyl- 
1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH) [12]. The exact procedure is described in SI.
To evaluate the conductivity of different hydrogels, their resistivity R 
was measured separately using a resistivity tester (Suzhou Jingge, 
ST2242, China).
Resistance to conductivity formula: G = 1/R
2.10. Hydrogel photothermal experiments
The detailed procedures for the photothermal experiments of the 
hydrogel can be found in the SI.
2.11. Cytocompatibility and blood compatibility of hydrogel
To assess the cytocompatibility and hemocompatibility of the 
hydrogels, extracts were prepared by incubating 200 μL of hydrogels in 
DMEM medium and sterile PBS at 37 ◦C for 24 h.
Cell experiments were conducted using NIH 3T3 cells, obtained from 
the Cell Resource Center, Shanghai Institutes for Life Sciences, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences. The experiments included a cytotoxicity assay 
using CCK-8, a cell scratch assay, and a cell live/dead staining assay. 
Detailed procedures were available in the SI.
Blood compatibility experiments were then performed with the 
hydrogel extract in PBS. The exact procedure is described in SI.
2.12. In vitro antimicrobial test
The detailed procedure was provided in the SI.
2.13. In vivo wound healing assessment
It was decided to use hydrogels containing GO2/BGs@PDA4 for the 
subsequent animal experiments. The detailed procedure is described in 
SI.
H&E staining and Masson staining were employed to evaluate 
healing effects. For detailed procedures, refer to the SI.
2.14. Immunofluorescence at wound site
The evaluation of inflammation at the wound location throughout 
different stages of healing was conducted. In vivo, immunofluorescence 
analysis was carried out using IL-1, CD86, Arg-1, and CD206 markers. 
The exact procedure is described in SI.
2.15. Statistical analysis
All experiments were carried out across a minimum of three separate 
trials. The data are shown as the mean ± standard deviation. To eval­
uate statistical significance, one-way ANOVA was employed, with P 
values represented as follows: * <0.05, ** <0.01, *** <0.001, **** 
<0.0001; "ns" indicates no significant differences.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Characterization of BGs and silver nanoclusters
After the synthesis of 45S5 BGs, the average weight percent of oxides 
was analyzed by XRF, with results presented in Table S1. The results 
indicated that the average chemical composition of each sample was 
consistent with the known composition of 45S5 within the preparation 
tolerances [48]. The IR spectrogram of BGs was shown in Fig. 1A, in 
which the characteristic absorption peaks of phosphate and Si-O-Si 
asymmetric stretching vibration were located at 450 cm−1 and 1000 
cm−1, respectively. The Si-O bond formed the basis of the 45S5 silicate 
network framework, and its appearance served as a key indicator for the 
successful synthesis of BGs [49]. The morphology of BG particles was 
analyzed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) at various magni­
fications. As shown in Fig. 1B, the particles exhibit an overall irregular 
shape and a relatively uniform particle size. The results of the EDS 
analysis were shown in Fig. 1C, which indicated that the four elements 
of Si, Na, Ca, and P were uniformly distributed in the BGs particles. All 
these results confirmed the successful synthesis of BGs and indicated 
their homogeneity and consistency. The detailed analysis of the particle 
size was conducted using a laser particle size analyzer to determine the 
number distribution and volume density. The analysis revealed that the 
number density of BGs was primarily concentrated within the range of 
2–10 μm, with a D50 value of 0.81 μm (Fig. 1D). The volume density, on 
the other hand, was distributed between 0.4 μm and 110 μm, with a D50 
value of 10.7 μm (Fig. S1).
The UV absorption and fluorescence spectra of AgNCs were shown in 
Fig. 1E. The AgNCs exhibited a strong absorption peak at 350 nm in the 
UV absorption spectrum. This phenomenon could be attributed to the 
discrete energy level structure due to their ultrafine size [28,50]. The 
fluorescence spectroscopy analysis showed that AgNCs exhibited fluo­
rescence peaks at an excitation wavelength (Ex) of 350 nm and an 
emission wavelength (Em) of 450 nm. As shown in Fig. 1F, the AgNCs 
were able to emit blue fluorescence when irradiated with a 300 W UV 
light (305 nm). This phenomenon confirmed the optical activity of 
AgNCs and further supported their potential application as fluorescent 
probes in monitoring the wound healing process [51]. As shown in 
Fig. 1G, the particle size of AgNCs nano microspheres synthesized using 
chitosan as a stabilizer was mainly concentrated in the range of 20–45 
nm by DLS analysis. The sample’s morphology was examined using 
Talos TEM, revealing that AgNCs were consistently enclosed within 
chitosan microspheres, as observed in both light and dark fields (Fig. 1H 
and Fig. S2). Furthermore, EDS analysis revealed that elemental Ag was 
surrounded by elemental nitrogen (N) in chitosan, which confirms the 
effective encapsulation and stabilization role of chitosan in the synthesis 
of AgNCs (Fig. 1H and I). These results demonstrated the successful 
synthesis of AgNCs using chitosan as a stabilizing agent.
3.2. Characterization of BGs@PDA and rGO/BGs@PDA
In this study, the strategy of coating the surface of BG with a layer of 
PDA was adopted to enhance the bioactivity of the BGs within the 
hydrogel and promote cell attachment [6]. The IR spectrums of BGs and 
BGs@PDA in Fig. 2A showed that the Si-O-Si telescopic vibrational 
peaks were both observed around 1025 cm−1, which was a typical 
characteristic peak of silicate-based BGs. Notably, BGs@PDA also 
exhibited the characteristic absorption peaks of PDA at 1500 cm−1 and 
1600 cm−1, corresponding to the backbone vibration of the benzene ring 
and the stretching vibration of the carbonyl group (C=O), respectively. 
In addition, BGs@PDA exhibited a stronger hydroxyl (O-H) stretching 
vibration peak at 3400 cm−1, further confirming the successful intro­
duction of the PDA coating and the consequent significant effect on the 
chemical bond between BGs and PDA.
It has been demonstrated that BGs can enhance the release of several 
cytokines from cells, such as basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) and 
F. Song et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Materials Today Bio 30 (2025) 101439 
6 

Fig. 3. Characterization of hydrogel. (A) Photographs of hydrogels adhering to different matrix materials. (B) The softness of rGO/BGs@PDA hydrogels. (C) 
Schematic representation of the macroscopic self-healing property of the hydrogel. (D) Hydrogel cyclic strain experiments. (E) CS-HEC, rGO2/BGs@PDA4, rGO4/ 
BGs@PDA4 hydrogels fixed at a frequency of 1 HZ for stress scanning and fixed at a stress of 5 % for frequency scan. (F) Water content analysis of the hydrogel. (G) 
Swelling rate of the hydrogel. (H) Stability of the hydrogel. (I) Degradation rate of the hydrogel. (J) DPPH scavenging rate of the hydrogel. (K) Electrical conductivity 
of the hydrogel. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
F. Song et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Materials Today Bio 30 (2025) 101439 
7 

vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which in turn facilitates the 
process of wound healing. This stimulatory effect is closely associated 
with converting BGs to hydroxyapatite (HA) [34,45]. As a biomaterial 
coating, PDA exhibits excellent low cytotoxicity. When applied to BGs, 
PDA effectively accelerates the degradation of BGs, which in turn pro­
motes the conversion of BGs to hydroxyapatite (HA), thereby optimizing 
the biocompatibility and bioactivity of the biomaterial. To further verify 
the promotive effect of PDA on the conversion of BGs to HA, an inves­
tigation was conducted by immersing the samples in simulated body 
fluid and comparing the appearance time points of the O-H stretching 
vibration peaks in IR spectra which illustrated the conversion of HA. In 
Fig. 2B, the PDA-coated BGs showed the O-H stretching vibration peak 
appeared two days earlier than that of BGs without PDA wrapping. 
Nevertheless, in Fig. S3, it was observed in the preliminary experiments 
that BGs@PDA was susceptible to sedimentation behavior during the gel 
formation process. To enable BGs@PDA to be uniformly dispersed in 
solution before gelation, graphene oxide (GO) was introduced into the 
system and improved the dispersibility significantly. Taking advantage 
of the fact that GO was reductive after polymerization, it was possible to 
load BGs@PDA on it after reduction [52,53]. By comparing the IR 
spectra of BGs@PDA and rGO/BGs@PDA (Fig. 2C), the results revealed 
that the vibrational peaks of the hydroxyl group of GO, which appear 
very broad at 3200 cm −1, are attenuated after reaction with PDA to 
form a bond. The stretching vibration peaks of the epoxy bonds corre­
sponding to GO in the range of 1220-1050 cm−1 disappeared after the 
ring-opening reaction with the amino group on PDA to form covalent 
bonds. The vibrational peak of the Si-O bond at 1020 cm−1 representing 
the BGs did not change. Thus, BGs@PDA was loaded on GO by redox 
reaction successfully. This platform also provided a feasible idea for 
hydrogel delivery of large-particle, easy-to-precipitate drugs through 
wrapping with reductive coatings followed by chemical reactions 
assisted loading to nanomaterials that can improve dispersity.
3.3. Characterization of rGO/BGs@PDA loaded CS-HEC/AgNCs 
hydrogel
It is important that the dressing fits and completely covers irregularly 
shaped wounds. Hydrogels with injectable properties can be a good 
solution to this problem [54]. The hydrogel could be injected through a 
syringe in Fig. 2D. Rheological experiments on the rGO2/BGs@PDA4 
hydrogel also verified the relationship between the viscosity and the 
shear rate of the hydrogels. Fig. 2E illustrates that as the shear rate 
increased from 0.1 S⁻1–1000 S⁻1, the viscosity of the hydrogel decreased, 
demonstrating its excellent shear-thinning behavior and feasible 
injectability.
The inversion method using test tubes was utilized to determine the 
gelation duration of the hydrogel. The formation times for various 
hydrogels were as follows: CS-HEC at 13.5 ± 0.92 min, rGO2/ 
BGs@PDA2 at 5.16 ± 0.63 min, rGO2/BGs@PDA4 at 3.08 ± 0.29 min, 
rGO4/BGs@PDA2 at 3.58 ± 0.29 min, and rGO4/BGs@PDA4 at 2.33 ±
0.14 min (Fig. 2F and G). As the content of BGs@PDA and rGO in the 
hydrogel system increased, there was a significant reduction in cross­
linking time. In particular, the elevated rGO content enhances the 
density of cross-links, which also contributes to a shorter crosslinking 
duration. The IR spectra of the hydrogel exhibited the formation of very 
broad O-H peaks at 3000 cm−1 -3500 cm−1 in Fig. 2H, indicating the 
presence of numerous hydrogen bonds within the system.
The morphology of the CS-HEC/AgNCs hydrogel and rGO/BGs@PDA 
hydrogel were analyzed by SEM. As shown in Fig. 2I, both CS-HEC and 
rGO/BGs@PDA hydrogels exhibited rich and uniformly distributed 
porous structures. This porous and homogeneous architecture provides 
an ideal microenvironment for drug delivery and cell adhesion while 
maintaining excellent breathability, which is crucial for oxygen supply 
and the removal of metabolic waste during the wound healing process. 
In contrast, the unloaded CS-HEC hydrogel presented a smoother sur­
face, whereas the rGO/BGs@PDA-modified hydrogel displayed a 
rougher texture and revealed the network structure formed by rGO. 
Subsequently, Micro-CT was employed to separately analyze the struc­
ture of the rGO/BGs@PDA hydrogel, and the results showed that its 
cross-section remained porous (Fig. S34). Additionally, due to the 
different compositions of the hydrogels, varying levels of contrast were 
observed under X-ray irradiation, clearly displaying the distribution of 
BGs within the hydrogel. These structural characteristics suggest that 
rGO/BGs@PDA hydrogels possess potential advantages in biomedical 
applications, particularly in promoting wound healing.
Hydrogel with adhesive properties can protect the wound during the 
healing process, isolating it from external contact while promoting tight 
binding of the drug to the wound, thereby stimulating cells to produce a 
variety of factors to accelerate healing [55]. The synthesized hydrogels 
were able to achieve effective adhesion to a wide range of different 
surface materials including skin in Fig. 3A, proving the versatility of 
hydrogel in the multipurpose application. Particularly noteworthy was 
that the hydrogel adhered to the skin surface and was difficult to 
dislodge even after light shaking. The superior adhesive properties of the 
hydrogel may be related to the presence of PDA. PDA contains a high 
number of reducible functional groups, such as catechol and amino 
groups, which enable PDA to form various physical and chemical in­
teractions with the skin, including π-π stacking and hydrogen bonding. 
These interactions enhance the adhesive performance of the hydrogel. 
Given the flexibility and stretchability of healthy skin, hydrogel dress­
ings must have adequate stretch properties [56]. For this purpose, we 
simulated the range of motion of the finger joints from 0◦flexion to 135◦
for testing. As illustrated in Fig. 3B, the hydrogel successfully returned to 
its initial size and form after being flexed from 0◦to 135◦and then 
returning to 0◦, which demonstrates the hydrogel’s excellent elongation 
and fatigue resistance characteristics.
In practical applications, hydrogels may deform or fracture during 
extrusion, increasing the risk of wound infection when used as dressings 
without self-healing properties [57]. To assess the hydrogel’s capacity 
for self-healing, macroscopic self-healing experiments were conducted. 
Results indicated that the cut hydrogel quickly adhered upon contact. 
Cyclic stress tests using a rheometer demonstrated that the hydrogel 
could recover to its original elastic modulus (G′) and loss modulus (G″) 
after four cycles of 5 % and 500 % stress (Fig. 3C and D). The superior 
self-healing property of rGO/BGs@PDA contained hydrogel may stem 
from the catechol groups on the PDA which promote the rapid formation 
of hydrogen bonds with water molecules upon maturation [58,59].
The mechanical properties of CS-HEC, rGO2/BGs@PDA4, and rGO4/ 
BGs@PDA4 hydrogels were also characterized. As shown in Fig. 3E, both 
rGO2/BGs@PDA4 and rGO4/BGs@PDA4 hydrogels exhibit a significant 
increase in G′ and G″ compared to CS-HEC hydrogel and the differences 
between rGO2/BGs@PDA4 and rGO4/BGs@PDA4 hydrogels were not 
significant. This phenomenon may be attributed to the introduction of 
GO into the hydrogel, which formed a rich cross-linking network, 
resulting in a significant increase in G′ and G″, while the rGO2/ 
BGs@PDA4 hydrogel had reached a saturated state within its cross- 
linking network. In this case, even a further increase in the content of 
GO could not significantly affect the mechanical properties of the 
hydrogel [60–62].
As shown in Fig. 3F, the hydrogels water contented of CS-HEC, rGO2/ 
BGs@PDA2, rGO2/BGs@PDA4, rGO4/BGs@PDA2, and rGO4/BGs@PDA4 
were 94.53 ± 0.89 %,95.45 ± 0.77 %,95.93 ± 1.54 %,95.42 ± 1.34 
%,96.56 ± 0.69 %, respectively. These results showed that the synthe­
sized hydrogels all possess water content comparable to that of the 
extracellular matrix and all exceeding 90 %, which was important for 
simulating the extracellular matrix microenvironment to promote cell 
attachment and growth [63]. Furthermore, the hydrogels’ swelling 
properties facilitate the absorption of wound exudate, maintaining a 
moist environment at the wound site and creating optimal conditions for 
healing. Additionally, the high-water content of the hydrogel provides a 
favorable environment for BGs, thereby accelerating the degradation 
rate of BGs. As shown in Fig. 3G, the swelling property of CS-HEC 
F. Song et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Materials Today Bio 30 (2025) 101439 
8 

hydrogel was comparatively weaker, likely due to reduced cross-linking 
within the hydrogel. The swelling behavior of rGO2/BGs@PDA2 and 
rGO4/BGs@PDA2 hydrogels was similar, which may be attributed to the 
redox reaction between rGO and PDA, potentially decreasing the like­
lihood of chemical bond formation between rGO and water molecules. 
However, when the ratio of BGs@PDA was increased in the 
rGO2/BGs@PDA4 and rGO4/BGs@PDA4 hydrogels, the swelling prop­
erties were significantly improved, surpassing those of the first three 
groups. This result suggested that the swelling characteristics of 
hydrogels can be effectively regulated to optimize their performance for 
specific applications by adjusting the ratio of BGs@PDA. The stability of 
the hydrogels is of critical importance to ensure a stable release of the 
drug and to maintain the morphology of the hydrogel during the healing 
process. As shown in Fig. 3H, the synthesized hydrogels first reached the 
solvation equilibrium and maintained the steady state for a certain 
period, and then gradually underwent degradation. CS-HEC exhibited a 
shorter maintenance duration and accelerated degradation, while 
rGO2/BGs@PDA4 and rGO4/BGs@PDA4 hydrogels demonstrated pro­
longed maintenance and slower degradation. This behavior is likely due 
to the introduction of rGO, which enhanced the cross-linking density, 
and PDA, which promotes chemical cross-linking with water molecules 
and CS.
The gradual degradation of the hydrogel during wound healing 
protects the wound from external disturbances and facilitates the 
controlled release of therapeutic agents, which is critical for the devel­
opment of wound dressings. An enzyme that degrades polymers, lyso­
zyme, is ubiquitously found in human plasma and serum and is 
particularly abundant in wound exudate. It is widely used to assess the 
biodegradability of hydrogels [64]. PBS with lysozyme was used for the 
degradation of CS-HEC, rGO2/BGs@PDA4, rGO2/BGs@PDA4, and 
Fig. 4. Photothermal properties of hydrogels. (A) Warming curves of different hydrogels at 0.75 W cm−2 power. (B) Warming curves of rGO2/BGs@PDA4 hydrogel 
under different powers irradiation. (C) Warming and cooling curves of rGO2/BGs@PDA4 hydrogel with three consecutive on/off cycles of laser irradiation. (D) 
Photothermal conversion efficiency of hydrogels containing rGO2/BGs@PDA4. (E) Graphs of the effect of warming different hydrogels at 0.75 W cm−2 power. (F) 
Graphs of warming effect of rGO2/BGs@PDA4 hydrogel under different powers irradiation. (G) Graphs of the effect of rGO2/BGs@PDA4 hydrogel with one on/off 
cycle of laser irradiation.
F. Song et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Materials Today Bio 30 (2025) 101439 
9 

Fig. 5. Biocompatibility and hemolysis assays and in vitro antimicrobial assays. (A) and (B) Cell viability assessments with hydrogel extract at different concen­
trations of 100 mg/mL and 50 mg/mL, respectively. (C) and (D) CCK-8 assay of rGO2/BGs@PDA4 hydrogel extracts at different concentrations. (E) Wound healing 
assay of rGO2/BGs@PDA4 hydrogel at concentrations of 100 mg/mL and 50 mg/mL. (F) Cell migration rate in the wound healing assay. (G) Hemolysis assay and 
hemolysis rate of rGO2/BGs@PDA4 hydrogel extracts of different concentrations. Insert the corresponding picture of the hemolysis experiment. (H) and (I) Bacterial 
viability of S. aureus and E. coli co-cultured with PBS (Control), AgNCs contained hydrogels (Group I), AgNCs and rGO2/BGs@PDA4 contained hydrogels (Group II), 
with and without light exposure. (J) and (K) Corresponding colony-forming unit (CFU) assay results for figure H and I. (L) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) 
images of S. aureus and E. coli after different treatments, scale bars at 5 μm and 10 μm *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
F. Song et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Materials Today Bio 30 (2025) 101439 
10 

rGO2/BGs@PDA4 hydrogels. As illustrated in Fig. 3I, the rate at which 
the CS-HEC hydrogel degrades was more rapid compared to the other 
materials, which can be ascribed to its intrinsic physical cross-linking 
mechanisms, including hydrogen bonding and van der Waals forces. In 
contrast, the other hydrogels not only featured these physical cross-links 
but also incorporated chemical cross-links, such as Schiff bases. 
Furthermore, as the content of BGs@PDA and rGO increased, the 
degradation period was extended, likely due to enhanced chemical 
cross-linking and increased overall cross-linking density within the 
hydrogels.
In wound infection, bacterial attack triggers the overproduction of 
free radicals, prolonging inflammation and hindering the healing pro­
cess [65]. Consequently, the capacity of hydrogels to scavenge free 
radicals is essential for enhancing the healing of wounds. To assess the 
free radical scavenging capacity of the hydrogels, the DPPH antioxidant 
assay was conducted. The free radical scavenging rate of CS-HEC 
hydrogel was 25.60 ± 1.76 %. In comparison, the other hydrogels 
showed superior antioxidant properties with scavenging rates of 58.70 
± 1.14 % (rGO2/BGs@PDA2), 63.06 ± 1.50 % (rGO2/BGs@PDA4), 
71.54 ±
0.81 % (rGO4/BGs@PDA2) and 73.05 ±
0.84 % 
(rGO4/Gs@PDA4), respectively (Fig. 3J). This enhancement may be 
attributed to the introduction of rGO and PDA, which enhance antiox­
idant capacity; rGO offers increased interaction opportunities with free 
radicals due to its oxygen-containing functional groups and large surface 
area, while the abundant phenolic -OH groups in PDA act as effective 
electron donors, facilitating reactions with and neutralizing free 
radicals.
Conductive wound dressings facilitate healing by mimicking 
endogenous electrical currents in the skin, effectively promoting the 
aggregation of key cells such as neutrophils, macrophages, and kerati­
nizing cells at the wound site [12,66,67]. GO is rich in oxygen and 
features various functional groups, including hydroxyl, epoxy, and 
carboxyl groups. These oxygen-containing groups make GO highly 
dispersible and relatively hydrophilic but significantly reduce its elec­
trical conductivity. The rGO restores part of its conjugated structure and 
improves electrical conductivity, although the process is incomplete, 
and some residual oxygen functional groups remain. Despite this, the 
electrical conductivity of rGO is significantly higher than that of pristine 
GO [62]. Therefore, it was chosen as the conductive component to 
impart electrical conductivity to the hydrogel. As shown in Fig. 3K, the 
conductivity of the hydrogel was significantly enhanced with the in­
crease of rGO content, and the conductivity of CS-HEC hydrogel was 
9.59 ± 0.19 %. The electrical conductivities of GO2/BGs@PDA2, 
rGO2/BGs@PDA4, rGO4/BGs@PDA2, and rGO4/BGs@PDA4 were all 
enhanced significantly, which were 60.78 ± 15.10 %, 64.20 ± 0.95 
%,83.29 ± 0.21 %, 88.06 ± 0.63 %, respectively. These results align 
with the previous study that an increase in rGO content significantly 
enhances the conductivity of the hydrogels.
3.4. Photothermal property
To assess the impact of rGO on photothermal conversion efficiency, 
BGs@PDA hydrogels were compared to rGO2/BGs@PDA4 hydrogels 
under identical laser irradiation conditions. The result, shown in Fig. S5, 
indicated that rGO-containing hydrogels demonstrated significantly 
higher photothermal conversion efficiencies, confirming rGO’s positive 
influence on the photothermal properties of hydrogel materials. 
Furthermore, the UV–vis absorption spectral analysis of the rGO2/ 
BGs@PDA4 hydrogel revealed a significant absorption capacity in the 
near-infrared (NIR) region (Fig. S6), suggesting its potential applications 
as a photothermal conversion material. The temperature changes of the 
rGO/BGs@PDA hydrogel during and after exposure to an 808 nm laser 
for 6 min, as well as it cools down to room temperature, owed in Fig. 4D. 
For further analysis, we plotted the relationship between time during the 
cooling process and the negative natural logarithm of the driving force 
temperature (Fig. 4D). According to relevant study [68], the 
photothermal conversion efficiency of the hydrogel was determined to 
be as high as 66.8 % through precise calculations, which significantly 
demonstrates its potential application in the field of photothermal 
therapy.
The photothermal conversion efficiency of various hydrogels at a 
constant power of 0.75 W cm⁻2 is illustrated in Fig. 4A and E. Under 808 
nm laser irradiation, the temperature rise accelerated with increased 
rGO content. After 150s irradiation, the internal temperature of 
hydrogels can reach 21.4 ◦C (CS-HEC), 50.8 ◦C (rGO2/BGs@PDA2), 
53 ◦C (rGO2/BGs@PDA4), 63.1 ◦C (rGO4/BGs@PDA2), 68.3 ◦C(rGO4/ 
BGs@PDA4), respectively. When PTT is employed to eliminate bacteria 
at the wound site, the temperature of dressings should not exceed 50 ◦C 
or it will cause irreversible damage to the wound tissue [69,70]. To 
ensure safe and effective PTT, it is important to regulate the photo­
thermal properties by adjusting the rGO content. The rGO2/BGs@PDA4 
hydrogel demonstrated optimal photothermal efficiency for this 
purpose.
Subsequently, the photothermal conversion efficiencies of rGO2/ 
BGs@PDA4 hydrogel at different power levels were explored, specif­
ically at 0.5 W cm−2, 0.75 W cm−2, 1.0 W cm−2, and 1.5 W cm−2. The 
findings illustrated in Fig. 4B and F indicate that the temperature in­
crease of the hydrogel exhibited a clear upward trend as the laser power 
increased. After the irradiation time of 120 s, the corresponding tem­
peratures reached 30.8 ◦C, 43.7 ◦C, 44.1 ◦C, and 50.7 ◦C, respectively. 
Considering that excessive temperature may cause damage to the wound 
tissue in practical applications, we adopted a power level of 0.75 W 
cm−2 in the following experiments to ensure the safety and efficacy of 
PTT. This decision was based on a rigorous analysis and an assessment of 
the requirements of clinical applications, aiming to establish a perfor­
mance parameter that is both safe and effective for subsequent antimi­
crobial and animal testing. Finally, we investigated the photothermal 
stability of the rGO2/BGs@PDA4 hydrogel by irradiating it with three 
consecutive on/off cycles of laser irradiation. After three cycles of 
irradiation, the hydrogel exhibited exceptional photothermal stability 
with its temperature change (ΔT) consistently maintained at a stable 
level of 40 ◦C, indicating the reliability and robustness of the rGO2/ 
BGs@PDA4 hydrogel under repeated photothermal stimulation (Fig. 4C 
and G).
3.5. Biocompatibility of hydrogels
The biocompatibility of hydrogels is a key consideration when 
evaluating their potential application as wound dressings. For this 
purpose, cytotoxicity tests, live/dead cell staining analysis, cell scratch 
assays, and blood compatibility tests were applied to evaluate the 
biosafety of hydrogels. Firstly, the CCK-8 method was employed to 
assess the impact of hydrogel extracts on cell viability. Extracts from 
various hydrogels were co-cultured with cells for 24 and 48 h, resulting 
in cell viability above 85 % for both periods, which was significantly 
higher than that of the control group, thereby demonstrating established 
biocompatibility (Fig. 5A and B). Building on insights from earlier 
photothermal studies, rGO2/BGs@PDA4 hydrogel was chosen for 
detailed examination. As depicted in Fig. 5C and D, after co-culturing 
different concentrations of hydrogel extracts with cells, the cell 
viability remained over 85 % for all tested concentrations. Notably, after 
24 and 48 h, extracts at 100 mg/mL and 50 mg/mL concentration 
significantly enhanced cell proliferation compared to other groups as 
well as the control. These results not only reaffirmed the biocompati­
bility of rGO2/BGs@PDA4 hydrogel but also highlighted its positive 
influence on cell proliferation at specific concentrations. To further 
validate the biosafety and effect of rGO2/BGs@PDA4 hydrogel on cell 
proliferation, a live/dead cell staining analysis was performed. As shown 
in Fig. S7, co-culturing different concentrations of hydrogel extracts 
with cells for 24 h did not lead to significant cell death and showed a pro- 
proliferative effect at concentrations of 100 mg/mL, 50 mg/mL, 25 mg/ 
mL, and 12.5 mg/mL. These results indicate that the hydrogel is 
F. Song et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Materials Today Bio 30 (2025) 101439 
11 

Fig. 6. Hydrogel in vivo wound healing effect. (A) Wound healing effect of 3M commercial film as control group, rGO2/BGs@PD4 hydrogel as group I, rGO2/ 
BGs@PD4 hydrogel with light treatment as group II at 0, 3, 7, 9, and 14 days (n = 6). (B) Wound healing schematic diagrams corresponding to the control group, 
group I, and group II. (C) Wound healing rate statistics at different healing times. (D) HE and Masson staining of wound tissue after 14 days, and its local 
magnification, scale bar 5 mm and 1 mm. (E) Statistics of granulation tissue thickness in the control group, group I and group II. (F) Collagen-positive area in control 
group, group I and group II. *P < 05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
F. Song et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Materials Today Bio 30 (2025) 101439 
12 

biocompatible and promotes short-term cell proliferation. At 48 h, the 
pro-proliferative effect of the hydrogel was significantly superior to that 
of the control group, although some cell death was observed. This result 
suggested that the hydrogel retained its pro-proliferative properties over 
time. Further validation of these pro-proliferative effects was conducted 
through cell scratch assays. As depicted in Fig. 5E and F, the hydrogel 
extract at a concentration of 100 mg/mL significantly enhanced cell 
proliferation and effectively induced cell migration toward the 
scratched area, surpassing both the control group and the concentration 
of 50 mg/mL group in efficacy.
To assess the safety of the hydrogel, particularly its blood compati­
bility as a wound dressing, hemolysis tests were conducted. As shown in 
Fig. 5G, the hemolysis rate of erythrocytes was less than 5 % (<5 % for 
good hemocompatibility) for both 100 mg/mL and other concentration 
groups after incubation with hydrogel extract. This low hemolysis rate 
suggests that the hydrogel does not induce significant rupture of red 
blood cells upon contact with the wound, thereby reducing the risk of 
potential inflammatory reactions and immune rejection.
3.6. In vitro antimicrobial test
The antimicrobial activity of the control and experimental group I 
(hydrogels containing AgNCs), and experimental group II (hydrogels 
containing AgNCs and rGO2/BGs@PDA4) were evaluated using E. coli 
and S. aureus. As shown in Fig. 5J and K, plate counting results indicated 
that the control group exhibited excessive bacterial growth both with 
and without laser irradiation, suggesting that NIR irradiation alone had 
minimal impact on bacterial proliferation. As shown in Fig. 5H and I, 
compared to the control group, the experimental results indicate that 
after co-culturing with Staphylococcus aureus, the antibacterial rates of 
experimental group I reached 98.2 % and 100 % under non-illuminated 
and illuminated conditions, respectively, while experimental group II 
exhibited antibacterial rates of 99.2 % and 100 % under the same con­
ditions. In the co-culturing experiment with Escherichia coli, the anti­
bacterial rates of experimental group I were 94.3 % and 97.5 % under 
non-illuminated and illuminated conditions, respectively, whereas 
experimental group II showed antibacterial rates close to 100 % 
regardless of illumination. These results demonstrated that the proposed 
hydrogel containing AgNCs and rGO2/BGs@PDA4 achieved rapid anti­
bacterial capability and sustained antibacterial effect by PPT and Ag ion 
mediated synergistic effect. These results confirm that CS-HEC hydro­
gels delivered with rGO2/BGs@PDA4 can utilize PTT and AgNCs for 
synergistic antimicrobial capacity.
Specifically, the introduction of rGO2/BGs@PDA4 in the hydrogel 
significantly enhanced its photothermal conversion efficiency, thereby 
further increasing the temperature and enabling rapid and efficient 
sterilization in the early stages. The plate count experiments demon­
strated that rGO2/BGs@PDA4 hydrogels exhibited excellent antibacte­
rial properties regardless of whether they were exposed to light or not. 
This phenomenon may be attributed to the antibacterial properties of 
both rGO and BGs@PDA. Additionally, the photothermal experiments 
revealed that rGO2/BGs@PDA4 possesses outstanding photothermal 
conversion efficiency, which further enhanced the antibacterial perfor­
mance of the hydrogel. After laser irradiation in the early stages, the 
hydrogel could rapidly kill the majority of bacteria, thereby reducing the 
need for AgNCs in the later stages of sterilization.
The addition of AgNCs alone in the hydrogel primarily played a role 
in slow sterilization in the later stages. Plate count experiments showed 
that after co-culturing with bacteria, AgNCs slowly released and met 
bacteria, leading to bacterial death. The experiments also revealed that 
hydrogels containing only AgNCs exhibited a high inhibition rate even 
when co-cultured with S. aureus without light exposure. When co- 
cultured with E. coli, the AgNCs hydrogel demonstrated a significant 
inhibitory effect compared to the PBS group, and this inhibition was 
even more pronounced after light exposure. It is speculated that this is 
related to the fact that AgNCs can also serve as a photothermal agent in 
photothermal therapy, further enhancing their antibacterial effect.
The antibacterial activities of the control, group I, and II hydrogels 
were further evaluated using live/dead bacterial staining assays. As 
shown in Fig. S8 (A) and (B), dead bacterial (red fluorescence) was 
detected rarely in the PBS group, irrespective of NIR laser irradiation. 
Unlike the control group, both group I and group II exhibited a notable 
decrease in green fluorescence intensity and an increase in red fluores­
cence intensity, with these effects becoming more evident after 
irradiation.
The morphological changes in E. coli and S. aureus treated with the 
control, group I, and group II hydrogels were further observed. As shown 
in Fig. 5L, bacteria in the control group maintained a smooth and intact 
surface with no significant morphological changes even after laser 
irradiation, indicating negligible damage following NIR treatment. In 
contrast, bacteria incubated with hydrogel group I exhibited slight 
wrinkling or collapse on their surfaces. Further examination of hydrogel 
group II revealed more pronounced morphological alterations in E. coli 
and S. aureus, including significant rupture or shrinkage, due to its 
unique synergistic antibacterial mechanism involving PTT and AgNCs 
permeation. By carefully comparing the results of experimental group I 
and experimental group II, we can clearly observe that the combined 
application of PTT and AgNCs has demonstrated a significant synergistic 
antibacterial effect. This synergistic action not only enhances the anti­
bacterial efficiency but also exhibits superior therapeutic efficacy in 
practical applications, further validating the complementary and syn­
ergistic nature of PTT and AgNCs in antibacterial treatment. These 
findings highlight the potential advantages of the proposed hydrogel in 
antibacterial applications.
3.7. In vivo wound healing assessment
The efficacy of the rGO/BGs@PDA hydrogel dressing in promoting 
wound healing was evaluated by using full-thickness skin (Fig. 6A). 
Considering the mechanical properties, biocompatibility, and photo­
thermal conversion efficiency of the hydrogel, the rGO2/BGs@PD4 
hydrogel was chosen as the experimental group I, while the light-treated 
version was group II, with 3M commercial film as the control. From day 
0 to day 14, wound photography showed a gradual decrease in wound 
area across all groups (Fig. 6B, C and E). Notably, groups I and II 
exhibited significantly enhanced wound healing rates from day three 
onward (P < 0.001), indicating that the rGO2/BGs@PD4 hydrogel 
significantly accelerated the healing process. By day 14, group II wounds 
were nearly healed, with neoplastic hairs covering the surface. The 
healing rates on day 14 were 87.03 ± 0.99 % for group I, 75.02 ± 1.29 
% for the control, and an impressive 99.9 ± 0.1 % for group II, 
demonstrating the superior efficacy of the rGO2/BGs@PD4 hydrogel, 
particularly with light treatment. The enhanced healing effect is likely 
attributed to the rGO2/BGs@PD4 hydrogel’s ability to facilitate a 
controlled degradation process during wound repair. Within this 
hydrogel matrix, the BGs are encapsulated by PDA, which provides a 
degradation environment that slowly releases encapsulated ions such as 
Si2+ and Ca2+. These ions, in turn, stimulate the secretion of various 
cytokines, including growth factors, at the wound site. This promotes 
accelerated healing, particularly after the initial observation period, 
which further enhances the degradation of BGs. Additionally, AgNCs 
encapsulated within the hydrogel are released gradually as the hydrogel 
degrades. Given their small particle size and the results of biocompati­
bility tests, the potential cytotoxicity of AgNCs is negligible in the 
context of wound healing promotion. This suggests that the rGO2/ 
BGs@PD4 hydrogel offers a promising strategy for accelerated wound 
repair with minimal cytotoxic concerns.
On day 14, tissue from the wound sites of the mice was collected and 
evaluated for healing effects among the groups using HE and Masson 
staining. As illustrated in Fig. 6D, an assessment of inflammation in the 
initial phases of healing demonstrated that the inflammatory responses 
observed in groups I and II were notably reduced compared to those in 
F. Song et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Materials Today Bio 30 (2025) 101439 
13 

Fig. 7. Immunofluorescence analysis. (A) Immunofluorescence of CD206, CD86, Arg-1, and IL-1β-labeled wound tissue on day 7 and 14, scale bar 200 μm. (B) CD86 
(C) CD206 (D) IL-1β (E) Arg-1 relative percent area coverage statistics. For all data, controls were set at 100 %. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001.
F. Song et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Materials Today Bio 30 (2025) 101439 
14 

the control group. This suggested that the rGO2/BGs@PD4 hydrogels 
were effective in diminishing inflammation, thus fostering a more 
favorable environment for the healing of wounds. During the ongoing 
inflammation, granulation tissue proliferates to dissolve and absorb 
necrotic tissue and foreign matter, filling the gaps and accelerating 
wound healing [12,71]. Consequently, the measurement of granulation 
tissue thickness serves as a key parameter in assessing wound healing. As 
illustrated in Fig. 6D and F, when evaluating the HE stained granulation 
tissue from the control group, as well as Groups I and II on the 14th day, 
it is evident that the granulation tissue in Group II exhibits a notable 
increase in thickness compared to the other two groups. This phenom­
enon may be due to the combined effects of temperature increase after 
illumination, acting in two aspects. Firstly, the rise in temperature 
effectively kills bacteria in the wound area, significantly reducing the 
level of inflammation and the risk of bacterial infection. Secondly, the 
increased temperature also accelerates the degradation of bioactive 
glass, releasing more bioactive components that can expedite the heal­
ing process of the wound, providing a more favorable environment for 
cell proliferation and neovascularization, thus promoting rapid healing 
and repair. The synergistic action of this series of reactions offers robust 
support and assurance for wound healing.
The buildup of collagen at the injury site plays an essential role in 
scar contraction, the regeneration of epithelial tissue, and the early 
development of the dermis [72,73]. Evaluations of collagen remodeling 
in the wound healing area after fourteen days were conducted using 
Masson staining, which indicated the collagen in group II was thicker, 
denser, and more orderly arranged compared to the other two groups 
(Fig. 6D and G). The collagen level in group II was measured at 55.73 ±
1.46 %, showing a notable increase compared to group I and the control 
group, which had values of 48.54 ± 3.46 % and 32.96 ± 2.40 %, 
respectively. These findings confirm that the rGO2/BGs@PD4 hydrogel, 
particularly with light exposure, enhances wound healing capabilities. It 
is postulated that the occurrence of this phenomenon may be associated 
with the increase in wound temperature following illumination, as the 
rise in temperature can lead to the death of most bacteria, thereby 
significantly reducing the inflammatory response. This change in the 
environment creates favorable conditions for the accumulation of 
collagen, which in turn facilitates the smooth progression of the wound 
healing process.
3.8. Immunofluorescence analysis
To further evaluate inflammation at the wound healing site, we 
analyzed the cytokines IL-1β and Arg-1, as well as the macrophage 
surface markers CD86 and CD206 by immunofluorescence staining. As 
shown in Fig. 7A, both on days 7 and 14, the levels of CD86 and IL-1β 
proteins were significantly reduced in the hydrogel groups, especially in 
the light-treated hydrogel group, compared to the control group. 
Conversely, the levels of CD206 and Arg-1 proteins were significantly 
increased. These findings indicate that the hydrogel, particularly when 
treated with light, effectively modulated the immune response, reduced 
inflammation, and promoted the formation of an anti-inflammatory 
environment. On day 7, fluorescence intensities of IL-1β and CD86, 
which indicate inflammatory responses, were significantly lower in 
groups I and II compared to the control group (Fig. 7B and C). In 
contrast, the fluorescence intensities of Arg-1 and CD206 (anti-inflam­
matory indicators) were significantly increased, suggesting that the 
rGO2/BGs@PD4 hydrogel also positively promotes anti-inflammatory 
responses and contributes to wound healing (Fig. 7D and E). By day 
14, these differences were even more pronounced, further confirming 
the superiority of our experimental groups I and II in attenuating wound 
inflammatory responses and promoting anti-inflammatory responses. 
These results fully validate our hypothesis that the rGO2/BGs@PD4 
hydrogel not only effectively reduces the inflammatory response of 
wounds, but also actively promotes the anti-inflammatory process, 
thereby accelerating wound healing.
4. Conclusion
In the healing process of infected wounds, urgent challenges are 
posed by the overuse of antibiotics leading to resistance and the cyto­
toxicity resulting from the extensive use of metal ions that need to be 
addressed. A thermally stable injectable hydrogel is presented in this 
study, which integrates PTT with AgNCs to achieve a synergistic anti­
bacterial effect. The rGO in the hydrogel is utilized as a photothermal 
agent, allowing light energy to be rapidly converted into heat upon 
irradiation, thereby elevating the temperature of the hydrogel and 
effectively killing bacteria. Compared to other metal ion-based anti­
bacterial hydrogels, a lower dosage of metal ions can be employed using 
AgNCs after an extensive bacterial killing through PTT, facilitating long- 
term treatment and preventing bacterial reinfection. The effectiveness of 
this synergistic antibacterial action is confirmed by bacterial viability/ 
dead staining and SEM observations. Moreover, the homogeneity of rGO 
in aqueous solutions allows it to be incorporated with BGs@PDA via 
redox reactions, thus resolving the issue of BGs@PDA precipitating at 
the bottom before the hydrogel gels. Additionally, exudates are 
continuously absorbed by the hydrogel during the wound-healing pro­
cess, and the slow degradation of bioactive glass is addressed by the 
encapsulation of PDA. During degradation, various ions, including Si2⁺, 
Ca2⁺, and Na⁺, are released by bioactive glass, which facilitates the 
release of multiple biofactors, such as fibroblast growth factor and basic 
epidermal growth factor, thereby accelerating wound healing. Further­
more, the electrical conductivity and free radical scavenging ability of 
the hydrogel are significantly enhanced by rGO generated from redox 
reactions, an advantage not possessed by GO. The hydrogel, composed 
of CS and HEC, is improved in mechanical strength and self-healing 
capacity through the utilization of abundant functional groups on PDA 
and rGO for chemical and physical cross-linking. Excellent biocompat­
ibility is demonstrated by this hydrogel in cell experiments, and signif­
icant promotion of cell proliferation and migration is observed. Upon 
application to wounds, inflammation is effectively inhibited by the 
hydrogel, collagen deposition is accelerated, and further promotion of 
wound healing is achieved. These findings underscore the potential of 
this hydrogel in wound repair and lay a solid foundation for future 
clinical applications. In summary, the combination of PTT and the 
synergistic antibacterial action of AgNCs positions this multifunctional 
hydrogel as a promising therapeutic option for clinical applications.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Fuqiang Song: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Visualization, Validation, Project administration, Methodology, Inves­
tigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Anqi Ye: 
Writing – review & editing, Methodology, Formal analysis, Data cura­
tion, Conceptualization. Linyuan Jiang: Methodology, Formal analysis, 
Data curation. Yang Lu: Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation. 
Yanzhen Feng: Formal analysis, Data curation. Rong Huang: Formal 
analysis, Data curation. Siting Du: Formal analysis, Data curation. 
Xiaoyu Dong: Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation, Concep­
tualization. Ting Huang: Formal analysis, Data curation. Ping Li: 
Formal analysis, Data curation. Liangliang Yang: Formal analysis, Data 
curation. Jinjing Zhang: Resources, Formal analysis, Data curation. 
Mengjia Xu: Writing – review & editing, Visualization, Validation, Su­
pervision, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Investiga­
tion, Funding acquisition. Li Cheng: Writing – review & editing, 
Supervision, Resources, Investigation, Funding acquisition. Jian Xiao: 
Writing – review & editing, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Re­
sources, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding 
acquisition.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known conflict of interest that 
F. Song et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Materials Today Bio 30 (2025) 101439 
15 

could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
This work was jointly supported by the Ningbo Natural Science 
Foundation (No. 2023J001), and the National Natural Science Foun­
dation of Zhejiang (LZ23H060001). The image Scheme 1 part of the 
article were supported by the Biorender application (https://apagebior 
ender.com).
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2024.101439.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] D. Chouhan, N. Dey, N. Bhardwaj, B.B. Mandal, Emerging and innovative 
approaches for wound healing and skin regeneration: current status and advances, 
Biomaterials 216 (2019) 119267, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biomaterials.2019.119267.
[2] M. Hosseini, A. Shafiee, Engineering bioactive scaffolds for skin regeneration, 
Small 17 (41) (2021) 2101384, https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202101384.
[3] Y.P. Liang, J.H. He, B.L. Guo, Functional hydrogels as wound dressing to enhance 
wound healing, ACS Nano 15 (8) (2021) 12687–12722, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsnano.1c04206.
[4] S. Zhang, G. Ge, Y. Qin, W. Li, J. Dong, J. Mei, R. Ma, X. Zhang, J. Bai, C. Zhu, 
W. Zhang, D. Geng, Recent advances in responsive hydrogels for diabetic wound 
healing, Materials Today Bio 18 (2023), https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
mtbio.2022.100508.
[5] Y.H. He, R.M. Chen, C. Zhao, Q. Lu, Z.P. Chen, H.X. Zhu, Q. Bu, L. Wang, H. He, 
Design of near-infrared-triggered cellulose nanocrystal-based intelligent wound 
dressings for drug-resistant bacteria-infected wound healing, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 14 (46) (2022) 51630–51644, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsami.2c13203.
[6] S. Tomar, R. Pandey, P. Surya, R. Verma, R. Mathur, G. Gangenahalli, S. Singh, 
Multifunctional, adhesive, and PDA-coated bioactive glass reinforced composite 
hydrogel for regenerative wound healing, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 9 (3) (2023) 
1520–1540, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsbiomaterials.2c01223.
[7] N. Namviriyachote, V. Lipipun, Y. Akkhawattanangkul, P. Charoonrut, G. 
C. Ritthidej, Development of polyurethane foam dressing containing silver and 
asiaticoside for healing of dermal wound, Asian J. Pharm. Sci. 14 (1) (2019) 63–77, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajps.2018.09.001.
[8] S. Homaeigohar, A.R. Boccaccini, Antibacterial biohybrid nanofibers for wound 
dressings, Acta Biomater. 107 (2020) 25–49, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
actbio.2020.02.022.
[9] S. Jiang, B.C. Ma, W. Huang, A. Kaltbeitzel, G. Kizisavas, D. Crespy, K.A.I. Zhang, 
K. Landfester, Visible light active nanofibrous membrane for antibacterial wound 
dressing, Nanoscale Horiz 3 (4) (2018) 439–446, https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
c8nh00021b.
[10] J. Li, X. Sun, J. Dai, J. Yang, L. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Guo, S. Bai, Y. Zheng, X. Shi, 
Biomimetic multifunctional hybrid sponge via enzymatic cross-linking to 
accelerate infected burn wound healing, Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 225 (2023) 
90–102, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2022.12.024.
[11] L. Li, D.F. Chen, J.L. Chen, C. Yang, Y.Y. Zeng, T. Jin, Y.M. Zhang, X.Y. Sun, H. 
L. Mao, Z.X. Mu, X.K. Shen, Z.W. Ruan, X.J. Cai, Gelatin and catechol-modified 
quaternary chitosan cotton dressings with rapid hemostasis and high-efficiency 
antimicrobial capacity to manage severe bleeding wounds, Mater. Des. 229 (2023), 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2023.111927.
[12] L.P. Qiao, Y.P. Liang, J.Y. Chen, Y. Huang, S.A. Alsareii, A.M. Alamri, F.A. Harraz, 
B.L. Guo, Antibacterial conductive self-healing hydrogel wound dressing with dual 
dynamic bonds promotes infected wound healing, Bioact. Mater. 30 (2023) 
129–141, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2023.07.015.
[13] Y.K. Ren, S.S. Ma, D. Zhang, S. Guo, R. Chang, Y.M. He, M.H. Yao, F.X. Guan, 
Functionalized injectable hyaluronic acid hydrogel with antioxidative and 
photothermal antibacterial activity for infected wound healing, Int. J. Biol. 
Macromol. 210 (2022) 218–232, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2022.05.024.
[14] C. Gao, W. Dai, X. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Huang, Z. Yuan, X. Zhang, Y. Yu, 
X. Yang, Q. Cai, Magnesium gradient-based hierarchical scaffold for dual-lineage 
regeneration of osteochondral defect, Adv. Funct. Mater. 33 (43) (2023), https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202304829.
[15] Y.M. Fan, M. Lüchow, Y.N. Zhang, J.J. Lin, L. Fortuin, S. Mohanty, A. Brauner, 
M. Malkoch, Nanogel encapsulated hydrogels as advanced wound dressings for the 
controlled delivery of antibiotics, Adv. Funct. Mater. 31 (7) (2021) 2006453, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202006453.
[16] X.G. Yang, D.D. Guo, X.T. Ji, C.Y. Shi, J.M. Messina, L.Y. Suo, J.T. Luo, 
Telodendrimer functionalized hydrogel platform for sustained antibiotics release in 
infection control, Acta Biomater. 178 (2024) 147–159, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
actbio.2024.02.041.
[17] Y. Chen, Y.J. Gao, Y. Chen, L. Liu, A.C. Mo, Q. Peng, Nanomaterials-based 
photothermal therapy and its potentials in antibacterial treatment, J. Contr. 
Release 328 (2020) 251–262, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2020.08.055.
[18] H. Liu, F. Xing, Y.X. Zhou, P.Y. Yu, J.W. Xu, R. Luo, Z. Xiang, P.M. Rommens, 
M. Liu, U. Ritz, Nanomaterials-based photothermal therapies for antibacterial 
applications, Mater. Des. 233 (2023) 112231, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
matdes.2023.112231.
[19] X. Liu, M. Shen, T. Bing, X. Zhang, Y. Li, Q. Cai, X. Yang, Y. Yu, A bioactive 
injectable hydrogel regulates tumor metastasis and wound healing for melanoma 
via NIR-light triggered hyperthermia, Adv. Sci. 11 (26) (2024), https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/advs.202402208.
[20] G. Xie, X. Wang, M. Mo, L.B. Zhang, J.T. Zhu, Photothermal hydrogels for 
promoting infected wound healing, Macromol. Biosci. 23 (2) (2023), https://doi. 
org/10.1002/mabi.202200378.
[21] Y.L. Xu, H.L. Chen, Y.F. Fang, J. Wu, Hydrogel combined with phototherapy in 
wound healing, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 11 (16) (2022) 2200494, https://doi.org/ 
10.1002/adhm.202200494.
[22] B.-D. Zheng, M.-T. Xiao, Polysaccharide-based hydrogel with photothermal effect 
for accelerating wound healing, Carbohydr. Polym. 299 (2023), https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.carbpol.2022.120228.
[23] Y. Hu, Q. Zeng, Y. Hu, J. He, H. Wang, C. Deng, D. Li, MXene/zinc ion embedded 
agar/sodium alginate hydrogel for rapid and efficient sterilization with 
photothermal and chemical synergetic therapy, Talanta 266 (2024), https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.talanta.2023.125101.
[24] H.L. Liu, X.L. Zhu, H.M. Guo, H.L. Huang, S.H. Huang, S.S. Huang, W. Xue, P. Zhu, 
R. Guo, Nitric oxide released injectable hydrogel combined with synergistic 
photothermal therapy for antibacterial and accelerated wound healing, Appl. 
Mater. Today 20 (2020), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apmt.2020.100781.
[25] Y.K. Zheng, M. Wei, H.B. Wu, F.Y. Li, D.S. Ling, Antibacterial metal nanoclusters, 
J. Nanobiotechnol. 20 (1) (2022) 328, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-022- 
01538-y.
[26] S. Javani, R. Lorca, A. Latorre, C. Flors, A.L. Cortajarena, A. Somoza, Antibacterial 
activity of DNA-stabilized silver nanoclusters tuned by oligonucleotide sequence, 
Acs Appl Mater Inter 8 (16) (2016) 10147–10154, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsami.6b00670.
[27] C. Wang, Y. Huang, Facile preparation of fluorescent Ag-clusters-chitosan-hybrid 
nanocomposites for bio-applications, New J. Chem. 38 (2) (2014) 657–662, 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c3nj00951c.
[28] A. Nakal-Chidiac, O. García, L. García-Fern´andez, F.M. Martín-Saavedra, 
S. S´anchez-Casanova, C. Escudero-Duch, J. San Rom´an, N. Vilaboa, M.R. Aguilar, 
Chitosan-stabilized silver nanoclusters with luminescent, photothermal and 
antibacterial properties, Carbohydr. Polym. 250 (2020), https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.carbpol.2020.116973.
[29] M.N. Rahaman, D.E. Day, B.S. Bal, Q. Fu, S.B. Jung, L.F. Bonewald, A.P. Tomsia, 
Bioactive glass in tissue engineering, Acta Biomater. 7 (6) (2011) 2355–2373, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2011.03.016.
[30] C. Yuan, D. Zhang, Y. Tang, Z. Guo, K. Lin, Y. Yu, J. Li, Q. Cai, Fibrous dressing 
containing bioactive glass with combined chemotherapy and wound healing 
promotion for post-surgical treatment of melanoma, Biomater. Adv. 149 (2023), 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioadv.2023.213387.
[31] Y. He, X. Wang, C. Zhang, J. Sun, J. Xu, D. Li, Near-infrared light-mediated 
cyclodextrin metal–organic frameworks for synergistic antibacterial and anti- 
biofilm therapies, Small 19 (35) (2023), https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202300199.
[32] M.K. Yazdi, M. Zare, A. Khodadadi, F. Seidi, S.M. Sajadi, P. Zarrintaj, A. Arefi, M. 
R. Saeb, M. Mozafari, Polydopamine biomaterials for skin regeneration, ACS 
Biomater. Sci. Eng. 8 (6) (2022) 2196–2219, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsbiomaterials.1c01436.
[33] L. Duan, H.D. Zhang, M.M. Huang, L. Sang, J.S. Zhang, External mass transfer 
performance studies in a micropacked bed reactor with Pd/PDA/nickel foam, Ind. 
Eng. Chem. Res. 63 (28) (2024) 12385–12393, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
iecr.4c00842.
[34] S. Naseri, W.C. Lepry, S.N. Nazhat, Bioactive glasses in wound healing: hope or 
hype? J. Mater. Chem. B 5 (31) (2017) 6167–6174, https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
c7tb01221g.
[35] W. Lee, J.U. Lee, B.M. Jung, J.H. Byun, J.W. Yi, S.B. Lee, B.S. Kim, Simultaneous 
enhancement of mechanical, electrical and thermal properties of graphene oxide 
paper by embedding dopamine, Carbon 65 (2013) 296–304, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.carbon.2013.08.029.
[36] M. Li, Y.P. Liang, J.H. He, H.L. Zhang, B.L. Guo, Two-pronged strategy of 
biomechanically active and biochemically multifunctional hydrogel wound 
dressing to accelerate wound closure and wound healing, Chem. Mater. 32 (23) 
(2020) 9937–9953, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c02823.
[37] Y.B. Schuetz, R. Gurny, O. Jordan, A novel thermoresponsive hydrogel based on 
chitosan, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 68 (1) (2008) 19–25, https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.ejpb.2007.06.020.
[38] P. Samyn, A platform for functionalization of cellulose, chitin/chitosan, alginate 
with polydopamine: a review on fundamentals and technical applications, Int. J. 
Biol. Macromol. 178 (2021) 71–93, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijbiomac.2021.02.091.
[39] Y. Luo, L. Cui, L. Zou, Y.P. Zhao, L. Chen, Y. Guan, Y.J. Zhang, Mechanically strong 
and on-demand dissoluble chitosan hydrogels for wound dressing applications, 
Carbohydr. Polym. 294 (2022), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2022.119774.
F. Song et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Materials Today Bio 30 (2025) 101439 
16 

[40] K. Enoch, C.S. Rakavi, A.A. Somasundaram, Thixotropic chitosan hydrogels for 
biomedical applications: unravelling the effect of chitosan concentration on the 
mechanical behaviour, Surface. Interfac. 50 (2024) 104475, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.surfin.2024.104475.
[41] A. Noreen, K.M. Zia, S. Tabasum, S. Khalid, R. Shareef, A review on grafting of 
hydroxyethylcellulose for versatile applications, Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 150 (2020) 
289–303, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.01.265.
[42] I. Hussain, X.F. Ma, L.L. Wu, Z.Y. Luo, Hydroxyethyl cellulose-based electrically 
conductive, mechanically resistant, strain-sensitive self-healing hydrogels, 
Cellulose 29 (10) (2022) 5725–5743, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10570-022-04622- 
6.
[43] T. Fekete, J. Borsa, E. Tak´acs, L. Wojn´arovits, Synthesis and characterization of 
superabsorbent hydrogels based on hydroxyethylcellulose and acrylic acid, 
Carbohydr. Polym. 166 (2017) 300–308, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
carbpol.2017.02.108.
[44] C. Pan, J.J. Li, W.L. Hou, S.S. Lin, L. Wang, Y. Pang, Y.F. Wang, J.Y. Liu, 
Polymerization-mediated multifunctionalization of living cells for enhanced cell- 
based therapy, Adv. Mater. 33 (13) (2021), https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adma.202007379.
[45] Y.Z. Li, L. Yang, Y. Hou, Z.Z. Zhang, M. Chen, M.X. Wang, J. Liu, J. Wang, Z. 
H. Zhao, C.M. Xie, X. Lu, Polydopamine-mediated graphene oxide and 
nanohydroxyapatite-incorporated conductive scaffold with an immunomodulatory 
ability accelerates periodontal bone regeneration in diabetes, Bioact. Mater. 18 
(2022) 213–227, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2022.03.021.
[46] Y.Y. Dou, Y.W. Zhang, S. Zhang, S. Ma, H. Zhang, Multi-functional conductive 
hydrogels based on heparin-polydopamine complex reduced graphene oxide for 
epidermal sensing and chronic wound healing, J. Nanobiotechnol. 21 (1) (2023), 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12951-023-02113-9.
[47] G.S. Polymeris, V. Giannoulatou, A. Kyriakidou, I.K. Sfampa, G.S. Theodorou, 
E. Sahiner, N. Meriç, G. Kitis, K.M. Paraskevopoulos, Bioactivity characterization of 
45S5 bioglass using TL, OSL and EPR: comparison with the case of 58S sol-gel 
bioactive glass, Mater. Sci. Eng., C 70 (2017) 673–680, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
msec.2016.09.051.
[48] J.R. Jones, Review of bioactive glass: from Hench to hybrids, Acta Biomater. 9 (1) 
(2013) 4457–4486, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2012.08.023.
[49] A. Kumar, S. Murugavel, A. Aditya, A.R. Boccaccini, Mesoporous 45S5 bioactive 
glass: synthesis, dissolution and biomineralization behavior, J. Mater. Chem. B 5 
(44) (2017) 8786–8798, https://doi.org/10.1039/c7tb01738c.
[50] K. Sahoo, T.R. Gazi, S. Roy, I. Chakraborty, Nanohybrids of atomically precise 
metal nanoclusters, Commun. Chem. 6 (1) (2023) 157, https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s42004-023-00958-7.
[51] X.Z. Luo, S.W. Cheng, W. Zhang, K. Dou, R. Wang, F.B. Yu, Near-infrared 
fluorescence probe for indication of the pathological stages of wound healing 
process and its clinical application, ACS Sens. 9 (2) (2024) 810–819, https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acssensors.3c02147.
[52] Y.M. Ha, Y.N. Kim, Y.C. Jung, Rapid and local self-healing ability of polyurethane 
nanocomposites using photothermal polydopamine-coated graphene oxide 
triggered by near-infrared laser, Polymers 13 (8) (2021) 1274, https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/polym13081274.
[53] P. Kumar, Harish, G. Andersson, K.M. Subhedar, H.S. Dhami, G. Gupta, A. 
K. Mukhopadhyay, R.P. Joshi, Utilization of green reductant Thuja Orientalis for 
reduction of GO to RGO, Ceram. Int. 47 (10) (2021) 14862–14878, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2020.08.063.
[54] A. Pal, B.L. Vernon, M. Nikkhah, Therapeutic neovascularization promoted by 
injectable hydrogels, Bioact. Mater. 3 (4) (2018) 389–400, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.bioactmat.2018.05.002.
[55] S. Wang, Y. Liu, Q. Sun, B. Zeng, C. Liu, L. Gong, H. Wu, L. Chen, M. Jin, J. Guo, 
Z. Gao, W. Huang, Triple cross-linked dynamic responsive hydrogel loaded with 
selenium nanoparticles for modulating the inflammatory microenvironment via 
PI3K/Akt/NF-κB and MAPK signaling pathways, Adv. Sci. 10 (31) (2023), https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/advs.202303167.
[56] F. Zhang, L.G. Xiong, Y.J. Ai, Z. Liang, Q.L. Liang, Stretchable multiresponsive 
hydrogel with actuatable, shape memory, and self-healing properties, Adv. Sci. 5 
(8) (2018), https://doi.org/10.1002/advs.201800450.
[57] P. Yang, Z. Li, B.R. Fang, L.L. Liu, Self-healing hydrogels based on biological 
macromolecules in wound healing: a review, Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 253 (2023), 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2023.127612.
[58] Z. Ling, Z. Chen, J. Deng, Y. Wang, B. Yuan, X. Yang, H. Lin, J. Cao, X. Zhu, 
X. Zhang, A novel self-healing polydopamine-functionalized chitosan-arginine 
hydrogel with enhanced angiogenic and antibacterial activities for accelerating 
skin wound healing, Chem. Eng. J. 420 (2021), https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
cej.2021.130302.
[59] R.L. Lu, X.D. Zhou, K. Peng, C. Liu, T. Yuan, P.F. Li, S.Y. Zhang, High-density 
dynamic bonds cross-linked hydrogel with tissue adhesion, highly efficient self- 
healing behavior, and NIR photothermal antibacterial ability as dressing for wound 
repair, Biomacromolecules 25 (4) (2024) 2486–2496, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acs.biomac.3c01443.
[60] X. Jing, H.Y. Mi, B.N. Napiwocki, X.F. Peng, L.S. Turng, Mussel-inspired 
electroactive chitosan/graphene oxide composite hydrogel with rapid self-healing 
and recovery behavior for tissue engineering, Carbon 125 (2017) 557–570, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbon.2017.09.071.
[61] K.C. Wasalathilake, D.G.D. Galpaya, G.A. Ayoko, C. Yan, Understanding the 
structure-property relationships in hydrothermally reduced graphene oxide 
hydrogels, Carbon 137 (2018) 282–290, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
carbon.2018.05.036.
[62] D. Aycan, F. Karaca, A. Koca, N. Alemdar, Electro-stimulated drug release by 
methacrylated hyaluronic acid-based conductive hydrogel with enhanced 
mechanical properties, Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 231 (2023) 123297, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2023.123297.
[63] A.D. Theocharis, S.S. Skandalis, C. Gialeli, N.K. Karamanos, Extracellular matrix 
structure, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 97 (2016) 4–27, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
addr.2015.11.001.
[64] M.L. Yin, S.S. Wan, X.H. Ren, C.C. Chu, Development of inherently antibacterial, 
biodegradable, and biologically active chitosan/pseudo-protein hybrid hydrogels 
as biofunctional wound dressings, Acs Appl Mater Inter 13 (12) (2021) 
14701–14712, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.0c21680.
[65] J. Li, K. Li, D. Shao, Y. Ding, L. Huang, X. Zheng, The synergistic antioxidant effect 
of polydopamine coating with amino-functionalized graphene quantum dots on 
osteoblast protection against oxidative stress, Appl. Surf. Sci. 613 (2023), https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2022.155950.
[66] X. Ou, L. Guan, W. Guo, X. Zhang, S. Wu, D. Guo, R. Li, A.V. Zvyagin, Q. Lin, 
W. Qu, Graphene oxide-based injectable conductive hydrogel dressing with 
immunomodulatory for chronic infected diabetic wounds, Mater. Des. (2022), 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2022.111284.
[67] Y. Zhao, Z. Li, S. Song, K. Yang, H. Liu, Z. Yang, J. Wang, B. Yang, Q. Lin, Skin- 
Inspired antibacterial conductive hydrogels for epidermal sensors and diabetic foot 
wound dressings, Adv. Funct. Mater. (2019), https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adfm.201901474.
[68] J. Zhao, J. Li, C. Zhu, F. Hu, H. Wu, X. Man, Z. Li, C. Ye, D. Zou, S. Wang, Design of 
phase-changeable and injectable alginate hydrogel for imaging-guided tumor 
hyperthermia and chemotherapy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10 (4) (2018) 
3392–3404, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.7b17608.
[69] L.L. Ma, Y.L. Zhou, Z.W.B. Zhang, Y.Q. Liu, D. Zhai, H. Zhuang, Q. Li, J.D. Yuye, C. 
T. Wu, J. Chang, Multifunctional bioactive Nd-Ca-Si glasses for fluorescence 
thermometry, photothermal therapy, and burn tissue repair, Sci. Adv. 6 (32) 
(2020), https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abb1311.
[70] J.X. Hong, J.Q. Zhu, X.X. Cao, B.Q. Pang, J.R. Xian, X.Q. Yin, Q.Y. Deng, M. 
H. Chen, Z.Y. Qin, C.Z. Liu, S.N. Varma, Y. Xiao, L. Xiao, M.T. Li, Photo-triggered 
multifunctional gold-based hybrid nanoflowers promote infectious skin 
regeneration, Chem. Eng. J. 482 (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
cej.2024.148937.
[71] Y.P. Liang, X. Zhao, T.L. Hu, B.J. Chen, Z.H. Yin, P.X. Ma, B.L. Guo, Adhesive 
hemostatic conducting injectable composite hydrogels with sustained drug release 
and photothermal antibacterial activity to promote full-thickness skin regeneration 
during wound healing, Small 15 (12) (2019), https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
smll.201900046.
[72] H.D. Zomer, T.D. Jeremias, B. Ratner, A.G. Trentin, Mesenchymal stromal cells 
from dermal and adipose tissues induce macrophage polarization to a pro-repair 
phenotype and improve skin wound healing, Cytotherapy 22 (5) (2020) 247–260, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcyt.2020.02.003.
[73] T.J. Keane, C.M. Horejs, M.M. Stevens, Scarring vs. functional healing: matrix- 
based strategies to regulate tissue repair, Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 129 (2018) 
407–419, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addr.2018.02.002.
F. Song et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
Materials Today Bio 30 (2025) 101439 
17