RESEARCH ARTICLE
www.afm-journal.de
A Mitochondria-Targeted Biomimetic Nanocarrier Improves
Oxygen Metabolism and Potentiates Chemo-Sonodynamic
Antitumor Therapy
Fang Zhang, Yong-Guo Hu, Xiao-Ling Lei, Ming-Yu Tian, Jia-Hua Zou,* Dong Zhou,
Jing Yuan, Kai Cheng,* Jin-Xuan Fan,* and Yuan-Di Zhao*
Sonodynamic therapy (SDT) exhibits high tissue penetration and negligible
radiation damage to normal tissue, but it hampered by the limited oxygen
in tumor, which can be potentiated via improving oxygen metabolism and
increasing oxygen utilization eﬃciency. Herein, a multifunctional biomimetic
nanocarrier (VI@R-T) is fabricated by encapsulating vanadium-based
nanozyme (VOx) with dual enzyme activity and sonosensitizer indocyanine
green (ICG) into the mitochondria-targeted erythrocyte vesicle. The nanocarrier
can be targeted to the mitochondria, where the enzyme in red blood cell
membrane catalyzed endogenous H2O2 to increase O2 content for
alleviating hypoxia. Meanwhile, nanozyme exhibits the NADH oxidase
(NOX) activity aﬀecting the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide/ﬂavin
adenine dinucleotide (NADH/FAD) balance in the cellular oxidative
phosphorylation, which impairs the mitochondrial electron transport chain
and reduces intracellular oxygen consumption, thereby signiﬁcantly improving
tumor oxygen metabolism and the eﬃcacy of SDT. In addition, nanozyme also
shows peroxide-like activity in tumor microenvironment (TME), and generates
highly toxichydroxyl radical (OH) for ROS-amplifying oxidative stress.
Deep-hypothermia potentiated 2D/3D autoﬂuorescence imaging also
monitored the nanocarrier eﬀectively disrupt the balance of NADH/FAD in the
tumor. This work provides anew approach for designing ROS-based
biomimetic nanomedical platform for tumor hypoxia relief.
1. Introduction
Non-invasive sonodynamic therapy (SDT) is an anti-tumor ther-
apeutic strategy based on reactive oxygen species (ROS), which
F. Zhang, Y.-G. Hu, X.-L. Lei, M.-Y. Tian, J.-H. Zou, J. Yuan, K. Cheng,
J.-X. Fan, Y.-D. Zhao
Britton Chance Center for Biomedical Photonics at Wuhan National
Laboratory for Optoelectronics – Hubei Bioinformatics & Molecular
Imaging Key Laboratory
Department of Biomedical Engineering
College of Life Science and Technology
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Wuhan, Hubei 430074, P. R. China
E-mail: zoujiahua@hgyy.org.cn;chengkaicp@hust.edu.cn;
jxfan@hust.edu.cn;zydi@mail.hust.edu.cn
The ORCID identiﬁcation number(s) for the author(s) of this article
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202504404
DOI: 10.1002/adfm.202504404
uses ultrasound (US) as a stimulus source
and activates the acoustic sensitizer to in-
teract with surrounding oxygen and water
molecule to produce highly cytotoxic ROS
and induce tumor cell apoptosis.[1–3] Com-
pared with traditional photodynamic ther-
apy (PDT), SDT possesses the advantages
of deeper penetration, higher safety, lower
cost, and lesser radiation damage to nor-
mal tissue, and it has a broad develop-
ment prospect in cancer treatment.[4–6] Al-
though the therapeutic advantages of SDT
have been conﬁrmed in preclinical stud-
ies of diversiﬁed cancer cell lines, tradi-
tional ultrasound therapy still faces sev-
eral challenges. For instance, conventional
sonosensitizer (such as porphyrin deriva-
tives) exhibits poor tumor speciﬁcity, and
early clearance, the retention in the tu-
mor is limited, leading to nonspeciﬁc ac-
tivation and toxic side eﬀects.[7] The hy-
poxic, acidic, and high interstitial pressure
microenvironment of solid tumor reduces
the generation eﬃciency of ROS, which
weakens the therapeutic eﬀect. Addition-
ally, the lack of real-time imaging guid-
ance and eﬃcacy assessment technologies
makes it diﬃcult to precisely control the timing of ultra-
sound stimulation.[8] Thanks to the rapid development of
nanomedicine, various nanomaterial has been prepared into
nanocarrier of sosensitizers, with the assistance of imaging
J.-H. Zou, D. Zhou
Department of Oncology
Huanggang Central Hospital of Yangtze University
No.126 Qi’an Road, Huangzhou District, Huanggang City, Hubei
438000, P. R. China
J.-H. Zou, D. Zhou
Hubei Clinical Medical Research Center of Esophageal and Gastric
Malignancy
Huanggang City, Hubei 438021, P. R. China
J. Yuan, Y.-D. Zhao
Key Laboratory of Biomedical Photonics (HUST)
Ministry of Education
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Wuhan, Hubei 430074, P. R. China
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2504404
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2504404 (1 of 18)

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
guidance, the tumor-targeted accumulation of nanosensitizer
also signiﬁcantly improved.[6] While hypoxia induce tumor cell
metastasis and proliferation, seriously hindering the eﬃcacy of
various oxygen-dependent therapies. SDT generates ROS by con-
suming oxygen, and rapid oxygen consumption leads to aggra-
vate hypoxia, then further inhibits the eﬃciency of SDT.[9–11] It
has been extensively demonstrated that pre-existing tumor hy-
poxia and hypoxia exacerbated by SDT further activate hypoxia-
inducible factor 1𝛼expression (HIF-1𝛼), which can lead to drug-
resistant resistance to ROS-based cancer therapy.[12] Although
the strategy of enhancing oxygen delivery to tumor site and
producing oxygen by catalyzing endogenous hydrogen perox-
ide (H2O2) has been widely used to directly or indirectly in-
crease oxygen content, reducing intracellular oxygen consump-
tion will be another important way to fundamentally allevi-
ate tumor hypoxia.[13,14] Mitochondria have attracted consider-
able recognition to be one of the potential targets for cancer
therapy.[15–18] As the organelle of energy metabolism in the center
of the cell, plays an important site of intracellular aerobic respi-
ration in the tumor cell, and closely related to intracellular en-
dogenous oxygen consumption.[19,20] Therefore, reducing intra-
cellular oxygen consumption to improve oxygen metabolism is
of great signiﬁcance to improve the eﬃcacy of SDT in cancer
therapy.
To meet the biological energy requirement of rapid growth of
the body, tumor cell exhibits various metabolic change and de-
pendency compared with normal cell, such as increased aerobic
glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation.[21,22] During the oxida-
tive phosphorylation metabolism, oxygen is consumed and ATP
is produced by transferring electron to a series of large multi-
subunit protein assemblies (complexes I to IV) in the inner mi-
tochondrial membrane. Speciﬁcally, the reduced and oxidized
forms of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH/NAD+) in
complex I are indispensable redox cofactors in the oxidative
phosphorylation, providing the proton motive force required for
the electron transport chain (ETC) through iterative oxidative
shuttling of electrons between NADH and NAD+. This cellu-
lar respiration provides constant source of energy for the sur-
vival, proliferation and metastasis of cancer cell.[23–25] So far,
many strategies based on the intervention of endogenous cel-
lular oxygen consumption have been adopted for tumor ther-
apy, including mitochondrial respiration inhibitor, enzyme in-
hibition in metabolic pathway, and synthetic metabolite trans-
porter blocking.[26–30] Therefore, it is a very interesting for tar-
geting mitochondria and destroying the NADH/NAD+ cycle to
impair the electron transport chain, thereby inhibiting mitochon-
drial respiration and reducing ATP supply, and greatly reducing
intracellular oxygen consumption and improving tumor oxygen
metabolism, which addressing the fundamental problem of alle-
viating tumor hypoxia and enhancing the oxygen dependent SDT
therapy. However, for aggressive and fast-growing malignant tu-
mor, it is diﬃcult to be cured by single SDT treatment. Therefore,
it is necessary to combine SDT with other therapeutic methods,
such as photodynamic therapy (PDT), chemotherapy, and chemo-
dynamic therapy (CDT) to achieve better therapeutic eﬀect.[2,31–33]
Chemodynamic therapy (CDT) is an emerging anti-tumor
strategy that based on transition metal element in response to the
tumor microenvironment (TME) by converting endogenous high
concentration of H2O2 into highly toxic hydroxyl radical (∙OH),
as the most active ROS, thereby enhancing intracellular oxidative
stress.[34–36] Nanozyme typically has stronger intra-tumor accu-
mulation eﬀect and exhibit higher catalytic therapeutic eﬃciency
compared to conventional natural enzyme, which makes nanoen-
zyme overcome the limitation of natural enzyme.[37] It also has
great potential for application in tumor therapy due to its mimetic
enzyme activities such as peroxidase (POD), oxidase (OXD), su-
peroxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT).[38] In recent stud-
ies, vanadium-based nanozyme with multivalent states have been
favored by researchers due to their tunable redox activity and
multiple mimetic enzyme catalytic activity.[39] Current research
on vanadium-based nanozyme is mainly based on the POD and
CAT mimetic enzyme activities for the detection of hydrogen per-
oxide, glucose and glutathione by electrochemical sensing.[40–42]
Despite great progress in developing vanadium-based nanozyme
for practical application, the relatively poor catalytic activity in the
dynamic physiological environment, severely limiting the poten-
tial biological application of in vivo nanocatalysis. Hence, there
is an urgent need to develop vanadium-based nanozyme with
good biocompatibility and multiple simulated enzyme activities
to cope with the complicated microenvironment in vivo.
Herein, a multifunctional mitochondria-targeted biomimetic
nanocarrier was designed for combined sonodynamic and
chemodynamic therapy of breast cancer by delivering erythro-
cyte membrane for producing in situ oxygen and vanadium-
based nanoenzyme for reducing intracellular oxygen consump-
tion to improv oxygen metabolism (Figure 1). In this design,
the natural erythrocyte membrane (RBCM) was selected as the
carrier, which was chemically modiﬁed and inserted into the
mitochondria-targeted phospholipid DSPE-TPP, and encapsu-
lated into vanadium-based nanozyme (VOx) with dual enzyme ac-
tivity and sonosensitiser indocyanine green (ICG), and US with
high depth of penetration was used as the stimulus source for
ROS generation. The nanocarrier VI@R-T has many unique ad-
vantages as a novel nanocarrier. a) ICG as a ﬂuorescent dye in
the near-infrared (NIR) I-region, which could monitor the en-
richment of VI@R-T at the tumor site via enhanced permeation
retention eﬀect (EPR) by the long-duration ﬂuorescence imag-
ing; b) the insertion of chemically modiﬁed phospholipid DSPE-
TPP in VI@R-T gave the nanocarrier the ability to target the
energy-supplying organelle mitochondria; c) erythrocyte mem-
brane as the nanocarrier not only prolonged the blood circula-
tion time in the body, but also catalyzed the production of oxy-
gen from the high level of H2O2 in the TME by the internal
natural enzyme system. And vanadium-based nanozyme with
NADH oxidase (NOX) activity disrupted the NADH/NAD+ bal-
ance and damaged the electron transport chain, then inhibited
the mitochondria respiration and reduced the intracellular oxy-
gen consumption, thus eﬀectively improving the metabolism of
oxygen and alleviating tumor hypoxia for enhancing the SDT
therapeutic eﬀect of nanocarrier; d) vanadium-based nanozyme
(VOx) with POD mimetic enzyme activity could produce highly
toxic hydroxyl radical in TME by Fenton-like reaction, thus sig-
niﬁcantly increasing intracellular ROS level to improve the anti-
tumor therapeutic eﬃciency of SDT combined with CDT. In vivo
and in vitro experiments demonstrated that the mitochondria-
targeted biomimetic nanocarrier VI@R-T enhanced the sonody-
namic eﬃcacy by in situ oxygen generation at the tumor site and
by reducing intracellular oxygen consumption, thus improving
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2504404
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2504404 (2 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202504404 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 1. A) Schematic illustration of synthetic route of biomimetic nanocarrier VI@R-T and B) the detailed chemodynamic and sonodynamic therapy
synergistic antitumor mechanism. VI@R-T is delivered to the tumor site via intravenous injection, and the mitochondria-targeted cascade reaction of
RBC within VI@R-T decompose the endogenous H2O2 to increase O2 content, and vanadium-based nanozyme VOx with NOX oxidase activity consumes
NADH and damage the electron transport chain to inhibit the mitochondria respiration. Subsequently, improving the intracellular oxygen metabolism
and alleviating tumor hypoxia for enhancing the ICG of SDT therapeutic eﬀect. Meanwhile, vanadium-based nanozyme with POD mimetic enzyme
activity triggers the production of self-expanding ROS through the Fenton reaction and facilitates tumor cell apoptosis.
oxygen metabolism and inhibiting the growth of breast can-
cer. This study provides a new idea of alleviating tumor hy-
poxia and also oﬀers important research value for the de-
velopment of safe and eﬃcient nanocarrier based on ROS
therapy.
2. Results and Discussion
2.1. Synthesis and Characterization of VI@R-T Nanocarrier
First, natural red blood cell membrane (RBCM) was extracted
from whole blood of mice by traditional hypotonic treatment, and
erythrocyte vesicle with uniform size was obtained by liposome
extruder. Then, it was chemically modiﬁed and inserted into the
coupled DSPE-TPP to obtain mitochondria-targeted red blood
cell membrane, and the multifunctional biomimetic nanocarrier
VI@R-T was constructed by loading vanadium-based nanozyme
VOx and sonosensitiser ICG into the red blood cell membrane.
The nanocarrier could be targeted to the energy-donating or-
ganelle mitochondria, the red blood cell membrane catalyzed
the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide for improving oxygen
deﬁciency, the vanadium-based nanozyme VOx depleted NADH
for impairing the electron transport chain and inhibiting mi-
tochondrial respiration, thereby increasing oxygen metabolism
and enhancing sonodynamic therapy of tumor. In the experi-
ment, vanadium-based nanozyme VOx with multivalent state was
ﬁrst prepared. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) charac-
terization revealed that the vanadium-based nanozyme was ho-
mogeneous in size and well dispersed, with size of ≈5–10 nm
(Figure 2A). After being encapsulated by red blood cell mem-
brane, the nanocarrier contained several small nanoparticles,
with size of ≈40–80 nm (Figure 2B,C). The result of protein
gel electrophoresis experiment conﬁrmed that the protein band
of erythrocyte membrane-encapsulated nanocarrier VI@R-T and
puriﬁed erythrocyte membrane (RBCM) and erythrocyte mem-
brane inserted with mitochondria-targeted phospholipid (R-TPP)
was basically the same (Figure 2D), indicating that almost all pro-
tein of the erythrocyte membrane was well preserved by the syn-
thesized biomimetic nanocarrier. By comparing the hydrated par-
ticle size before and after encapsulation, it could also be seen
that the size of nanocarrier also increased from 82 to 104 nm,
it might be due to the strong hydrophilicity of the erythrocyte
membrane, resulting in the hydrated particle size was signif-
icantly increased (Figure 2E). The loading eﬃciencies of VOx
and ICG were 35.82±2.39%, 12.18±1.06%, respectively. Among
them, the content of vanadium-based nanoenzyme VOx was de-
termined by atomic absorption, loading rate of ICG was cal-
culated according to the standard curve of ICG concentration
and absorption value. In addition, the stability of the nanocar-
rier VI@R-T was also evaluated. The result demonstrated that
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2504404
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2504404 (3 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202504404 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 2. Characterization of nanocarrier. A) TEM of vanadium-based nanozyme VOx. B,C) TEM and magniﬁcation image of the nanocarrier VI@R-T.
D) SDS-PAGE protein analysis of erythrocyte membrane, RBCM, R-TPP, and VI@R-T. E) The hydrated particle size of VOx, R-T, and VI@R-T. F) The
absorption spectra of VOx, R-T, ICG, and VI@R-T. G) The infrared spectra of modiﬁed material before and after mitochondria-targeted phospholipid and
H) high resolution XPS spectrum of V. I) The XPS spectrum of VI@R-T.
the hydrated particle size of VI@R-T in water, PBS, NaCl,
Dulbecco’s modiﬁed eagle medium (DMEM) and DMEM+10%
serum did not show any signiﬁcant change, indicating that
it had good stability in diﬀerent media (Figure S1, Sup-
porting Information). The hydrated particle size and poly-
dispersity coeﬃcient of VI@R-T stored in diﬀerent solution
at 4 °C, 25 °C, and 37 °C were also measured with time.
It was found that the hydrated particle size and PDI of
the nanocarrier did not change signiﬁcantly within 5 days,
indicating that the nanocarrier possessed excellent stability
at diﬀerent temperature and media (Figure S2, Supporting
Information).
Then, the prepared nanocarrier was further characterized. The
UV–vis absorption spectra showed that the nanocarrier VI@R-
T had characteristic absorption peak of red blood cell mem-
brane protein at 280 and 410 nm, and sonosensitizer indocya-
nine green ICG at 780 nm, indicating that the successful encap-
sulation of substance by the nanocarrier VI@R-T (Figure 2F).
It revealed that the nanozyme exhibits absorption within ICG’s
excitation/emission wavelength range, and the close proximity
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2504404
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2504404 (4 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202504404 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
between the two substances upon co-encapsulation energy trans-
fer could occur. The eﬀect of vanadium-based nanozyme en-
capsulation on the ﬂuorescence property of ICG was inves-
tigated by measuring the ﬂuorescence spectra of free ICG,
nanocarrier loaded solely with ICG (I@R-T), and nanocarrier
co-encapsulating both the VOx and ICG (VI@R-T). The quan-
titative analysis revealed that the encapsulation of vanadium-
based nanozyme with the sonosensitizer ICG resulted in 18%
ﬂuorescence quenching (Figure S3, Supporting Information).
In the synthesis of mitochondria-targeted phospholipid, DSPE-
mPEG-NH2 with the amino group was linked to triphenylphos-
phine (TPP) with the carboxyl group by coupling reaction. Fourier
infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) appeared a stretching vibration
of the amide II band of mPEG-TPP at 1550 cm−1, indicating
that the amidation reaction between the carboxyl group of TPP
and the amino group of DSPE-mPEG-NH2 successfully linked
(Figure 2G). In order to investigate the mixed-valence property
of V, the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) characteriza-
tion of vanadium-based nanozyme VOx was carried out, and the
result revealed that vanadium-based nanozyme consisted of V
and O elements (Figure S4, Supporting Information); The high-
resolution XPS spectrum demonstrated that V had four main
peaks (Figure 2H), which were derived from V 2p2/3 and V 2p1/2,
respectively. The peaks at 515.57 and 522.65 eV corresponded
to V4+, and 516.97 and 524.13 eV corresponded to V5+, which
accounted for ≈48.2% and 51.8%, indicating that the prepared
vanadium-based nanozyme composed of with a mixed valence
compound of V4+ and V5+.[43] Meanwhile, XPS characterization
of the nanocarrier showed that VI@R-T consisted of Na, O, N, C,
S, and P (Figure 2I; Figure S5, Supporting Information), which
also further conﬁrmed the successful preparation of the nanocar-
rier VI@R-T.
2.2. In Vitro Enzyme Catalytic Property of VI@R-T Nanocarrier
A large number of studies have shown that that insuﬃcient oxy-
gen content in tumor greatly attenuates the eﬀect of sonody-
namic therapy, whereas the tumor tissue has high concentra-
tion of H2O2 and abundant catalase on the red cell membrane,
which can catalyze the high level of H2O2 to produce oxygen
for alleviating hypoxia.[16] The catalase activity by the commer-
cial assay kit, and the results showed that both erythrocyte mem-
brane vesicles and the biomimetic nanocarrier (VI@R-T) exhib-
ited strong catalase-like activity (606.7 and 525.1 U mL−1, re-
spectively, at equivalent membrane concentrations). The incor-
poration of the payload material only caused a minor reduction
in enzymatic activity, indicating that the catalase function re-
mained well preserved in the ﬁnal nanocarrier system. There-
fore, the ability of catalyzing the production of oxygen from H2O2
by biomimetic nanocarrier VI@R-T was evaluated. The result
showed that when only H2O2 was present in the system, the con-
centration of dissolved oxygen was not changed (Figure 3A); and
the concentration of dissolved oxygen also remained almost un-
changed when the vanadium-based nanozyme VOx was added,
suggesting that neither possessed the ability of producing oxy-
gen; when the nanocarrier VI@R-T was present in the system
without H2O2, the concentration of dissolved oxygen also did
not change; However, once H2O2 was added to the nanocarrier
VI@R-T, the concentration of dissolved oxygen increased rapidly
and gradually reached stability with the extension of time, and
the content of dissolved oxygen gradually increased with the in-
crease of H2O2 concentration, showing an obvious concentration
dependence (Figure 3B). Meanwhile, the eﬀect of pH on the cat-
alytic activity of nanocarrier was also explored due to the weakly
acidic microenvironment in tumor. The result conﬁrmed that af-
ter the nanocarrier was stored in the weakly acidic environment
for 3 h, the concentration of dissolved oxygen at pH 6.5 remained
almost the same compared with that at pH 7.4 (Figure 3C), and
there was no obvious change even after the storage time was pro-
longed to 12 h (Figure S6, Supporting Information), indicating
that the nanocarrier also possessed high enzyme catalytic activity
in the weakly acidic tumor microenvironment.
In our design, erythrocyte membrane acted as nanocarrier to
encapsulate the mixed-valence vanadium-based nanozyme VOx
and sonosensitiser indocyanine green ICG, in which vanadium
as the transition metal element, has been shown to generate
the hydroxyl radical ∙OH via the Fenton-like reaction in the pre-
vious study.[42] Next, 3,3″,5,5″-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) was
used as an indicator to detect POD mimetic enzyme activity, in
which TMB was oxidized to oxTMB by ∙OH with a character-
istic absorption peak at 650 nm. Since ICG had a strong ab-
sorption peak at 780 nm, nanocarrier V@R-T encapsulated with
vanadium-based nanozyme VOx without ICG was selected to do
the related experiment. Based on the diﬀerence of microenviron-
ment between normal tissue and tumor tissue, the eﬀect of pH
on the production of ∙OH was explored. It was found that the
characteristic absorption peak was signiﬁcantly enhanced at pH
6.5, however, this phenomenon did not occur in pH 7.4. This
indicated that the nanocarrier only exhibited POD mimetic en-
zyme activity under weakly acidic condition (Figure S7, Support-
ing Information). Therefore, subsequent experiment was chosen
to explore the inﬂuence of other condition on the production of
∙OH in the weakly acidic environment. Meanwhile, it was also
found that neither TMB nor H2O2 detected signiﬁcant character-
istic absorption peak at 650 nm under weakly acidic condition,
whereas signiﬁcant absorption appeared when H2O2 was added
to V@R-T (Figure 3D), and the absorption peak exhibited the sig-
niﬁcant concentration dependence, which was signiﬁcantly en-
hanced with the increase of the nanocarrier and H2O2 concen-
tration (Figure 3E,F), and also veriﬁed that the presence of mixed
valence state of vanadium-based nanozyme supported the redox-
active mimetic enzyme property.
Despite the promising application of the nano-enzymatic
mechanism of action, due to the short lifetime of ROS, it would
be scavenged by the high level of reducing substance in can-
cer cell during the ROS-based therapy, which greatly diminished
therapeutic eﬀect. In this case, a complementary strategy was to
interfere with tumor metabolism through enzyme-like catalytic
processes. As two important coenzyme factors of the cell energy
metabolism, NADH and NAD+ participate in many redox reac-
tions in the body, and also provide the proton power for the elec-
tron respiratory transport chain of mitochondria, and are also im-
portant for producing ATP during the oxidative phosphorylation
of tumor cell. And NADH, as a reducing substance can also clear
ROS.[44] Since V@R-T exhibited excellent POD-mimicking en-
zyme activity, it was further explored whether it could simulate
NADH oxidase (NOX) activity to deplete NADH by absorption
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2504404
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2504404 (5 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202504404 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 3. Characterization of catalytic property of nanocarrier. A) The concentration of dissolved oxygen produced by diﬀerent material after adding
H2O2. B) The change of dissolved oxygen concentration after VI@R-T incubating with diﬀerent concentration of H2O2. C) The change of dissolved
oxygen concentration after VI@R-T incubating with H2O2 at diﬀerent pH for 3 h. D) The absorption spectra of ∙OH produced by the nanocarrier V@R-T
after reacting with H2O2. The absorption spectra of ∙OH produced by diﬀerent concentration of nanocarrier E) V@R-T and F) H2O2. The change of
absorption spectra of the NADH depleted by nanocarrier G) V@R-T and H) R-T with time; the schematic of the dual enzyme activity of vanadium-based
nanozyme I) VOx.
spectroscopy. It was found that when the low concentration
nanocarrier V@R-T (12.5 μg mL−1) was incubated with NADH,
the absorption of NADH at 340 nm gradually decreased over
time, while the absorption value of NAD+ at 280 nm gradually
increased (Figure 3G). In addition, the higher the concentration
of V@R-T nanocarrier, the change in absorption of NADH at
340 nm is higher (Figure S8, Supporting Information). How-
ever, the absorption spectrum of NADH in the R-T nanocar-
rier system hardly changed (Figure 3H), excluding the inﬂuence
of the nanocarrier itself on NADH depletion. This proved that
vanadium-based nanozyme could deplete NADH through NOX
mimicking enzyme activity, thus oxidizing NADH to NAD+. The
above result indicated that the vanadium-based nanozyme VOx
not only possessed POD mimetic enzyme activity to produce ∙OH
through Fenton-like reaction, but also exhibited excellent NADH
mimetic enzyme activity to consume NADH, thus decreasing the
chance of ROS generated to be scavenged by reducing substance
in tumor cell, and this kind of vanadium-based nanozyme with
dual enzyme activity could undoubtedly signiﬁcantly improve the
eﬀect of ROS-based treatment (Figure 3I).
2.3. In Vitro Activity Study of VI@R-T Nanocarrier
First, whether the nanocarrier could be eﬀectively taken up by
tumor cell was investigated at the cellular level. The nanocar-
rier VI@R-T was incubated with mouse breast cancer 4T1 cell
for diﬀerent time and the ﬂuorescence intensity of ICG in the
nanocarrier was analyzed by confocal ﬂuorescence imaging and
ﬂow cytometry. It was observed that the red ﬂuorescence of
ICG began to appear in the cytoplasm after 1 h of incuba-
tion, and the intracellular red ﬂuorescence gradually increased
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2504404
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2504404 (6 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202504404 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 4. Fluorescence imaging and ﬂow analysis of VI@R-T nanocarrier at the cellular level. A) Fluorescence imaging and B) ﬂow analysis of cellular
uptake of nanocarrier after incubation for diﬀerent time. C) The confocal image of subcellular localization of VI@R and VI@R-T and corresponding
ﬂuorescence quantitative analysis after 6 h incubation with cell. D) The statistic of Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcient analysis of intracellular ﬂuorescence
intensity. E) The ﬂuorescence imaging and ﬂow analysis of intracellular ROS detected by DCFH-DA after 4T1 cell with diﬀerent treatment F) hemolysis
assay of VI@R-T nanocarrier and the inset showed the cell smear micrograph of the nanocarrier incubated with red blood cell for 6 h.
with the extension of incubation time, which also indicated that
more and more nanocarrier entered the tumor cell through the
endocytosis pathway (Figure 4A). The result of ﬂow cytometry
was consistent with ﬂuorescence imaging and also demonstrated
a time-dependent enhancement trend (Figure 4B). Compared
with the control group, the intracellular relative ﬂuorescence
intensity was ≈9.45% after incubation for 1 h, and increased
to 55.85% when incubation time was extended to 6 h (Figure
S9, Supporting Information). It has been reported that after the
nanocarrier entering cell and being internalized, they were usu-
ally transported to the endosome/lysosome and escaped through
lysosome for subsequent intracellular targeting. Because of the
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2504404
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2504404 (7 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202504404 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
negative charge of the cell and mitochondrial membrane, triph-
enylphosphine (TPP), as a delocalized lipophilic cation, was used
to mediate tumor drug to overcome the barrier of cell and mito-
chondrial membrane and ﬁnally target mitochondria.[47] In the
design of the nanocarrier, TPP was covalently linked to DSPE-
mPEG-NH2 via the amidation reaction and embedded into the
erythrocyte membrane, which endowed the nanocarrier with the
ability of targeting to mitochondria. So, the unmodiﬁed TPP-
targeted phospholipid nanocarrier VI@R and the modiﬁed TPP-
targeted phospholipid nanocarrier VI@R-T were prepared to ex-
plore whether TPP has the property of inducing the aggregation
of nanocarrier in mitochondria. The internalization process of
the two nanocarriers in cancer cell was observed by confocal ﬂu-
orescence imaging, in which Mito Tracker Green labeled mito-
chondria was shown in green, Hoechst 33 342 labeled nuclei
was shown in blue, and ICG in the nanocarrier was shown in
red ﬂuorescence. The result of co-localization ﬂuorescence imag-
ing showed that the red ﬂuorescence of ICG in cancer cell in-
cubated with the nanocarrier VI@R partially overlapped with
mitochondrial green ﬂuorescence, but the red ﬂuorescence in
cancer cell incubated with nanocarrier VI@R-T showed obvious
overlap, and the color was also close to yellow, showing obvi-
ous mitochondrial targeting ability (Figure 4C). The colocaliza-
tion analysis of ﬂuorescence intensity of cell in the two groups
also showed that Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcient of VI@R-T
was 0.854, much higher than 0.459 of VI@R (Figure 4D), which
veriﬁed that the nanocarrier modiﬁed with TPP phospholipid
was able to speciﬁcally target to subcellular organelle mito-
chondria. To further verify the targeting mechanism of mem-
brane potential diﬀerence on mitochondria, we pre-treated cell
with carbonyl cyanide 3-chlorophenylhydrazone (CCCP, 5 μm),
which was an ionophobe that causes a rapid decline in mito-
chondrial membrane potential. The result showed that after 6 h
of co-incubation, the red ﬂuorescence (ICG) of CCCP+VI@R-
T treatment group barely overlapped with the green ﬂuores-
cence of mitochondria, and that Pearson’s correlation coeﬃcient
of was 0.42, much lower than the cell not treated with CCCP.
This further highlighted the signiﬁcance of the mitochondrial
membrane potential in TPP targeting (Figure S10, Supporting
Information).
The main pathway of apoptosis induced by nanocarrier VI@R-
T was ROS-based therapy, which involved the production of ∙OH
by the vanadium-based nanozyme VOx through the Fenton-like
reaction and singlet oxygen (1O2) by the sonodynamic eﬀect of
ICG under ultrasonic stimulation. Then, DCFH-DA was used as
an indicator to investigate the intracellular ROS production, in
which non-ﬂuorescent DCFH-DA can be oxidized to with green
ﬂuorescence DCF by intracellular ROS, and the more ROS gen-
erated, the stronger intracellular green ﬂuorescence. After dif-
ferent nanocarrier was incubated with cancer cell for 6 h, the
ﬂuorescence imaging showed that very little green ﬂuorescence
appeared in the blank control group and the ultrasound treated
group due to the presence of endogenous ROS in the cancer cell,
indicating that ultrasound treatment could not induce ROS pro-
duction (Figure 4E). Some green ﬂuorescence appeared in the
group incubated with V@R-T nanocarrier, which was due to the
production of ∙OH by the vanadium-based nanozyme VOx via the
Fenton-like reaction in response to TME. And the group incu-
bated with I@R-T nanocarrier after ultrasonic treatment showed
more obvious intracellular green ﬂuorescence compared with the
V@R-T treatment group, which was attributed to the fact that
the sonosensitizer I@R-T was swallowed into the cell and gen-
erated ROS through the sonodynamic eﬀect, while the natural
enzyme system of the erythrocyte membrane catalyzed the de-
composition of high concentration of H2O2 to produce oxygen in
tumor cell, thereby promoting the eﬀect of sonodynamic to prod-
uct ROS. While the intracellular green ﬂuorescence intensity of
cancer cell incubated with VI@R-T nanocarrier was signiﬁcantly
enhanced with ultrasonic stimulation, which was due to the ef-
fect of the superposition of two groups mentioned above. The in-
tracellular production of ROS in each treatment group was also
further assessed by ﬂow cytometry. The result showed that the rel-
ative ﬂuorescence intensity of DCF in each group was basically
consistent with the result of ﬂuorescence imaging, the intracellu-
lar relative ﬂuorescence intensity after ultrasonic treatment was
essentially indistinguishable from that of control group, whereas
in the VI@R-T treatment group stimulated by ultrasound had
the strongest relative ﬂuorescence intensity, which also indicated
that the prepared nanosensitizer could eﬀectively generate ROS
in cancer cell, providing a strong feasibility validation for ROS-
based therapy. Meanwhile, the blood compatibility was important
for biosafety evaluation, and the blood safety of nanocarrier was
also evaluated through the hemolysis experiment of the nanocar-
rier on red blood cell. The result showed that the hemolysis rate
of the red blood cell was 100% in water, while it was 0 in PBS,
which was due to the diﬀerence in osmotic pressure (Figure 4F).
When the nanocarrier VI@R-T was incubated with red blood cell
for 6 h and the concentration was as high as 1 mg mL−1, a slight
hemolysis phenomenon occurred, and when the concentration
of the nanocarrier was smaller, the hemolysis rate was also lower.
Moreover, the cell smear made by incubating diﬀerent concentra-
tion of nanocarrier with red blood cell observed by microscope,
which showed that the morphology of erythrocyte was basically
the same as that in the PBS treatment group, and the shape
was keep relatively complete, whereas the red blood cell in water
showed more fragmentation due to hemolysis. This also proved
that the nanocarrier had good haemocompatibility with erythro-
cyte, which provided a safety guarantee for the in vivo mouse
test.
Next, the biosafety of nanocarrier was further explored at
the cellular level. The cytotoxicity of diﬀerent concentration of
nanocarrier on mouse embryonic ﬁbroblast cell (3T3) and mouse
ﬁbroblast cell (L929) was studied by standard MTT assay. It
was found that even when the concentration of nanocarrier was
as high as 100 μg mL−1, two kinds of cell had high cell sur-
vival rates of 89.26% and 94.59%, respectively (Figure S11A,
Supporting Information), indicating that the nanocarrier exhib-
ited low toxicity and good biosafety to the normal cell. How-
ever, when diﬀerent concentration of nanocarrier was incubated
with mouse breast cancer 4T1 cell, the cytotoxicity result demon-
strated that the cell survival rate decreased signiﬁcantly with the
increase of nanocarrier concentration, showing an obvious con-
centration dependence, and the cell survival rate was only 67.5%
when the nanocarrier concentration reached 100 μg mL−1 (Figure
5A). This was because the growth of tumor cell was more vig-
orous than that of normal cell, and the weak acidic microen-
vironment and relatively high H2O2 content in the tumor cell
provided the necessary condition for the Fenton-like reaction of
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2504404
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2504404 (8 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202504404 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 5. Therapeutic eﬀect and mitochondrial damage of VI@R-T nanocarrier on 4T1 cell. A) The cell viability of 4T1 cell with diﬀerent concentration of
VI@R-T nanocarrier and ultrasonic treatment was determined by MTT assay. The relative level of intracellular B) NADH and C) ATP. D) The ﬂuorescence
imaging of intracellular oxygen content under normal and anaerobic condition detected by ruthenium dichloride. E) The ﬂuorescence imaging of mito-
chondrial membrane potential of 4T1 cell with diﬀerent treatment. F) Calcein-AM and PI staining of 4T1 cell with diﬀerent treatment for ﬂuorescence
imaging, G) ﬂow cytometry and H) the proportion of diﬀerent cell types.
vanadium-based nanozyme VOx to produce ∙OH, which was
conducive to the chemodynamic therapy in cancer cell. In con-
trast, the nanocarrier R-T without encapsulating any substance,
showed good cytocompatibility to 4T1 cell, and the cell sur-
vival rate was 98.4%, suggesting that the erythrocyte membrane
nanocarrier had good safety and did not have any therapeutic ef-
fect on cancer cell (Figure S11B, Supporting Information). When
the incubation time of nanocarrier was extended to 24 h, the
cell viability was signiﬁcantly reduced. And the IC50 of nanocar-
rier by incubating 4T1 cells with varying concentrations for
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2504404
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2504404 (9 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202504404 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
24 h was 33.93 μg mL−1 by MTT assay (Figure S12, Supporting
Information).
Subsequently, the therapeutic eﬀect of ultrasound-triggered
SDT on cancer cell was also detected by MTT assay. The result
demonstrated that after ultrasound stimulation, the cell viabil-
ity of the control group was almost unaﬀected and still main-
tained the high cell survival rate, however, the cell viability of
the VI@R-T+US treatment group was signiﬁcantly decreased,
and gradually declined with the increase of the nanocarrier con-
centration (Figure 5A). When the concentration of nanocarrier
was 25 μg mL−1, the cell survival rate decreased to 70.50%, show-
ing a signiﬁcant diﬀerence compared with the cell in the non-
ultrasound-treated group (p < 0.05). When the concentration of
nanocarrier was 100 μg mL−1, the survival rate of ultrasound-
stimulated cell was only 33.43%, which was even more signif-
icantly diﬀerent from that of the non-ultrasound-treated group
(p < 0.01), indicating that the eﬀect of sonodynamic combined
with chemodynamic of nanocarrier was signiﬁcantly better than
that of the single treatment group. In addition, Mitochondria
act as the powerhouse of the cell, and oxidative phosphorylation
was central to the glycolytic metabolism of tumor cell, in which
electron was transferred to the transmembrane protein complex
in the inner membrane of the mitochondria, that was the elec-
tron transport chain (ETC). Therefore, continuous NADH/NAD+
cycling was important for cell proliferation and biosynthesis.
The relative content of intracellular NADH after incubation
with the nanocarrier V@R-T encapsulated with vanadium-based
nanozyme was detected using the NADH detection kit, and
the result revealed that the intracellular NADH content gradu-
ally declined with the increase of the nanocarrier concentration,
which showed an obvious dose-dependence, suggesting that the
nanocarrier treatment group seriously aﬀected the NADH/NAD+
cycle, thus disturbing the cellular energy metabolism homeosta-
sis (Figure 5B). In addition, the relative content of intracellular
ATP was detected by the ATP detection kit, and found that the
intracellular ATP produced by the nanocarrier treatment group
was severely inhibited, and the decrease rate was as high as 60.3%
when the concentration was 100 μg mL−1 compared with the con-
trol group (Figure 5C). It was inferred that because endogenous
NADH played a key role in the transmembrane proton translo-
cation and proton dynamic required for ATP synthesis, once the
NADH/NAD+ cycle was disrupted and then the electron trans-
port chain was damaged, thereby reducing the mitochondrial
membrane potential and ultimately leading to the inhibition of
ATP synthesis.
Then, whether the nanocarrier could eﬀectively alleviate hy-
poxia in cancer cell was explored. During the experiment, the
4T1 cell was treated with the anoxic mimicant deferriamine to
simulate the anoxic environment of tumor, and [Ru(dpp)3]Cl2
was used as an indicator to monitor intracellular oxygen content.
The complex exhibited bright red ﬂuorescence, and the gener-
ated oxygen would quench the red ﬂuorescence, that was, the
higher the amount of intracellular oxygen, the weaker the red ﬂu-
orescence. The result showed that cancer cell in the anoxic state
showed bright red ﬂuorescence due to insuﬃcient oxygen con-
tent, while the red ﬂuorescence of cell cultured in the normal
state was signiﬁcantly weaker (Figure 5D). However, regardless of
normal state or anaerobic state, when the cell was incubated with
the same concentration of erythrocyte vesicle R-T, the intracellu-
lar red ﬂuorescence was signiﬁcantly weaker compared with the
control group. The ﬂuorescence intensity was weakened when
the cell was incubated with the nanocarrier V@R-T encapsu-
lated with vanadium-based nanozyme, which further suggested
that vanadium-based nanozyme VOx cooperated with the erythro-
cyte membrane to alleviate hypoxia. The possible reason was that
vanadium-based nanozyme VOx disrupted NADH/NAD+ cycling
and damaged mitochondrial electron transport chain, resulting
in a decrease in ATP level, thereby inhibiting mitochondrial res-
piration and reprograming oxygen metabolism in tumor cell. Fur-
thermore, it had been reported that mitochondrial ETC function
damage caused by NADH/NAD+ imbalance was generally con-
sidered to be one of the important causes of cell dysfunction.[30]
Therefore, mitochondrial membrane potential was detected us-
ing the ﬂuorescent dye JC-1, which was sensitive to the mitochon-
drial membrane potential. When the mitochondrial membrane
potential decreased, the JC-1 dye changed from the red color of
the JC-1 aggregate to the green color of the JC-1 monomer. The
ﬂuorescence imaging result revealed that the cancer cell in the ul-
trasound treatment group exhibited bright red ﬂuorescence and
very weak green ﬂuorescence as in the control group (Figure 5E).
However, when the nanocarrier VI@R-T was incubated with can-
cer cell, the red ﬂuorescence was relatively weakened, while the
green ﬂuorescence was slightly enhanced. And after the ultra-
sonic stimulation was applied, the cell showed obvious green ﬂu-
orescence and extremely weak red ﬂuorescence, suggesting that
most mitochondria were in the state of depolarization, which also
indicated that the nanocarrier could induce mitochondrial func-
tion damage. Based on the above result, nanocarrier could eﬀec-
tively promote mitochondrial damage. The double staining ﬂuo-
rescence imaging of 4T1 cell using Calcein-AM and PI was per-
formed with diﬀerent treatment to verify the synergistic thera-
peutic eﬀect. In which, Calcein-AM could stain living cell with
strong green ﬂuorescence, and PI could label dead cell with red
ﬂuorescence. It was demonstrated that ultrasound-treated 4T1
cell exhibited bright green ﬂuorescence without red ﬂuorescence
as in the control group, indicating that ultrasound had almost
no eﬀect on cancer cell. While in the VI@R-T treatment group,
there was some red ﬂuorescence as well as green ﬂuorescence,
which was due to the ∙OH induced apoptosis of cancer cell by
the Fenton-like reaction of the nanocarrier VI@R-T. After ultra-
sonic stimulation, there was a large amount of red ﬂuorescence
and very little green ﬂuorescence in the cell, suggesting that the
sonodynamic eﬀect of the nanocarrier signiﬁcantly promoted cell
apoptosis, which also demonstrated that CDT combined with
SDT could eﬀectively inhibit the growth of cancer cell (Figure 5F;
Figure S13, Supporting Information). Furthermore, to quantita-
tively study the apoptosis induced by the nanocarrier VI@R-T,
4T1 cell was analyzed by Annexin V-FITC and PI ﬂow apoptosis
staining. It could be seen that there was only very small amount
of early apoptotic cell in the control group and the ultrasound
treatment group, accounted for 2.61% and 5.90%, respectively
(Figure 5G). Whereas the proportion of cell in early apoptosis
state signiﬁcantly increased to 18.2% in the nanocarrier VI@R-T
treatment group. And after ultrasonication stimulation, ≈50.1%
of cell was in the early apoptosis and late apoptosis state. Analy-
sis of the cell in apoptotic and necrotic state in each group also
demonstrated that the proportion of synergistic treatment group
was signiﬁcantly higher than that in the other treatment groups
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2504404
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2504404 (10 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202504404 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
(Figure 5H). This was consistent with the result of the ﬂuores-
cence imaging and cytotoxicity treatment, and also suggested that
CDT combined with SDT could synergistically inhibit cancer cell
growth.
In addition, it had been extensively shown that most tumor-
related death was caused by tumor metastasis, that was, the ad-
hesion between primary tumor cell decreased, then progressively
acquired greater invasiveness through direct inﬁltration and im-
plantation of blood, lymphatic vessel or adjacent structure.[47]
The migration of tumor cell was studied by cell scratching ex-
periment. In detail, 4T1 cell was incubated with diﬀerent con-
centration of nanocarrier VI@R-T, and the inhibitory eﬀect of
nanocarrier on cell migration was investigated at 0, 8, 24, 36,
and 48 h, respectively. The result showed that the scratched of
untreated tumor cell was almost completely healed due to the
strong proliferation ability of cancer cell. However, when the
cancer cell was treated with the concentration of 12.5 μg mL−1
nanocarrier VI@R-T, signiﬁcant inhibitory eﬀect on cell migra-
tion at 8 h, and the inhibition of migration could be maintained
until 48 h (Figure S14, Supporting Information). In addition, the
migration inhibition also showed an obvious concentration de-
pendence, with the increase of the concentration of nanocarrier
VI@R-T, the migration inhibition of tumor cell was stronger, in-
dicating that the prepared nanocarrier could eﬀectively inhibit
the growth of cancer cell, which further veriﬁed the therapeu-
tic eﬀect and laid a solid foundation for in vivo treatment of
tumor.
2.4. In Vivo Biosafety Evaluation of VI@R-T Nanocarrier
The biosafety of nanocarrier plays a very important role in the in
vivo treatment of mice, therefore, the in vivo safety of nanocar-
rier was assessed by evaluating the blood routine and biochem-
ical index analysis. The six-week-old female Balb/C mice were
randomly divided into three groups (ﬁve mice in each group, 18–
22 g), which were divided into the control group, single injection
group (one injection of nanocarrier for one day), and multiple in-
jection group (three times injection of nanocarrier for 30 days).
The result of blood routine showed that the red blood cell (RBC),
hemoglobin (HGB) and platelet (PLT) of mice in the single in-
jection group and multiple injection group remained almost un-
changed compared with the control group, indicating that the
nanocarrier had good blood compatibility (Figure S15B–D, Sup-
porting Information). The white blood cell (WBC) of the mice in
the multiple injection group decreased slightly compared with
the control group, which might be due to fact that the leuko-
cyte resisted the interference of foreign substance in the body
(Figure S15A, Supporting Information). Subsequently, liver and
renal function indexes were also tested, in which alanine amino-
transferase (ALT), albumin transaminase (AST) and serum alka-
line phosphatase (ALP) were used to evaluate the liver function
indexes (Figure S15E, Supporting Information), and blood urea
nitrogen (BUN), creatinine (CR), and uric acid (UA) were used
to evaluate the renal function indexes (Figure S15F–H, Support-
ing Information). The result showed that compared with the con-
trol group, these indexes were not signiﬁcantly diﬀerent and were
within the normal reference range. In addition, at the end of the
observation period, whether the nanocarrier had any eﬀect on the
organ was also determined by the change of the organ index of
the mice in each group. The result demonstrated that the organ
index of mice in either the single injection group or the multiple
injection group compared with the control group, and they were
all within the normal reference range (Figure S15I–L, Supporting
Information). Meanwhile, the result of H&E section of the organ
of the mice in each group also showed no obvious tissue dam-
age or pathological change in the heart, liver, spleen, lung and
kidney tissue (Figure S15M, Supporting Information). Therefore,
the result conﬁrmed that the synthesized nanocarrier exhibited
excellent biocompatibility and could be further used for in vivo
experiment in mice.
2.5. In Vivo Imaging of the VI@R-T Nanocarrier
The main reason for the poor eﬃcacy of the ROS-based ther-
apy was the low penetration retention eﬀect at the tumor site.
Therefore, in this work, the tumor retention eﬀect and bio-
logical distribution of nanocarrier in the mouse subcutaneous
breast cancer model were mainly studied (6 weeks, 18–22 g).
In this experiment, indocyanine green (ICG) contained in the
VI@R-T nanocarrier was selected as the ﬂuorescent imaging
dye, which was a near-infrared I-region ﬂuorescent dye and
an FDA-approved dye for in vivo application, with a deeper
depth of penetration into living tissue than the cyanine dye.
By comparing the ﬂuorescence imaging of mice at diﬀerent
time with the free dye ICG and the nanocarrier VI@R-T, it was
found that the ﬂuorescence signal was distributed throughout
the whole body of the mice shortly after injection of the free
drug ICG and disappeared rapidly with the prolongation of time
(Figure 6A). However, the ﬂuorescence intensity of ICG at tu-
mor site decreased signiﬁcantly after 24 h of injection. In con-
trast, in the nanocarrier VI@R-T treatment group, the ﬂuores-
cent signal was mainly enriched in the tumor site, and the ﬂu-
orescence signal of ICG in the tumor was still unusually pro-
nounced after 48 h of injection. This also indicated that com-
pared with free ICG, the nanocarrier VI@R-T exhibited a longer
metabolic cycle due to the long blood circulation time in vivo of
the red blood membrane. Subsequently, the major organs such
as heart, liver, spleen, lung, kidney and tumor were stripped from
mice injected with free drug ICG and nanocarrier VI@R-T at 6
and 12 h, and ﬂuorescence imaging of the organs were performed
by IVIS imaging system (Figure S16A, Supporting Information).
The result demonstrated that the ﬂuorescence signal in the free
ICG group was mainly distributed in lung and tumor, while that
in the VI@R-T group was mainly distributed in tumor. At 12 h,
the ﬂuorescence signal in the VI@R-T group was signiﬁcantly
stronger than that in the free ICG group, which further con-
ﬁrmed that the nanocarrier VI@R-T had good tumor retention
performance.
It has been extensively demonstrated that glycolysis, as well as
the classic Warburg eﬀect, had been traditionally considered as
the main energy source of cancer cell, oxidative phosphorylation
(OXPHOS) was still the main pathway for the synthesis of ATP
for most cell. NADH/NAD+, as an essential redox cofactor, pro-
vided proton power to the electron transport chain through itera-
tive oxidation.[30] In the previous in vitro experiment, it had been
veriﬁed that vanadium-based nanozyme VOx could eﬀectively
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2504404
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2504404 (11 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202504404 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 6. Distribution study of VI@R-T nanocarrier in vivo. A) The ﬂuorescence imaging at diﬀerent time after injection of free ICG and nanocarrier
VI@R-T into the tail vein of 4T1 tumor bearing mice. B) The 2D deep-hypothermia autoﬂuorescence imaging of NADH and FAD. C) The redox ratio of
NADH/(NADH+FAD), and the corresponding area histogram of 4T1 tumor at diﬀerent time.
deplete NADH, thereby altering the relative content of NADH
at the tumor site and aﬀecting the NADH/FAD redox balance.
In this study, the deep cryogenic two/three-dimensional ﬂuores-
cence imaging system induced by liquid nitrogen was used to
detect endogenous NADH/FAD autoﬂuorescence intensity as an
indicator to monitor the state of cell energy metabolism. The
two-dimensional and three-dimensional imaging results showed
that NADH ﬂuorescence signal was strong and FAD signal was
weak in the tumor tissue before injection of nanocarrier VI@R-
T, indicating that the tumor site showed a strong reduction state
(Figure 6B; Figure S16B, Supporting Information). While the ﬂu-
orescence intensity of NADH gradually decreased with the ex-
tension of the injection time, and the ﬂuorescence intensity of
FAD gradually increased, and the distribution pattern of redox
ratio was consistent with that of NADH ﬂuorescence intensity. At
12 h, the ﬂuorescence signal of NADH was the weakest, the ﬂu-
orescence signal of FAD was the strongest, and the ﬂuorescence
signal of NADH/(NADH+FAD) was also the weakest, suggesting
that the tumor tissue was in a strong oxidation state at this time.
Meanwhile, the regional intensity analysis of NADH redox also
further veriﬁed the variation trend of NADH content in tumor
site over time (Figure 6C). It could also be seen from the his-
togram analysis diagram of the representative region that with
the prolongation of injection time, the NADH/(NADH+FAD)
value gradually weakened, and the redox ratio also gradually de-
creased. This also further veriﬁed that nanocarrier could accumu-
late in the tumor for a long time from the tissue level and gradu-
ally consume intracellular NADH, which in turn interfered with
the energy metabolism at the tumor site.
2.6. In Vivo Synergistic Antitumor Study of VI@R-T Nanocarrier
To evaluate the synergistic anti-tumor eﬀect of the nanocarrier
VI@R-T in vivo, a treatment strategy was designed for 4T1 sub-
cutaneous breast cancer mice (6 weeks, 18–22 g) (Figure 7A). In
the sonodynamic therapy, oxygen was the basis for ROS genera-
tion, and severe hypoxia in solid tumor limited the eﬀect of sono-
dynamic therapy. The tumor was stripped from mice with diﬀer-
ent treatment, and the hypoxia status of the tumor site was ob-
served by immunoﬂuorescence staining with hypoxia-inducible
factor (HIF-1𝛼) antibody. It was found that compared with the
control group injected with PBS, the red ﬂuorescence of HIF-
1𝛼in the tumor of mice injected with the VI@R-T treatment
group was signiﬁcantly reduced, which was due to the relatively
high level of H2O2 in the tumor tissue compared with the nor-
mal tissue, and the abundant catalase enzyme in erythrocyte
membrane catalyzed oxygen production (Figure 7B). In addi-
tion, the vanadium-based nanozyme VOx damaged mitochon-
drial electron respiratory transport chain through the depletion of
NADH, inhibited mitochondrial respiration and reprogrammed
oxygen metabolism, and the two superimposed eﬀect synergis-
tically alleviated the hypoxic state of the tumor site. After ultra-
sound stimulation was applied at this time, the red ﬂuorescence
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2504404
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2504404 (12 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202504404 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Figure 7. In vivo antitumor therapy of VI@R-T nanocarrier. A) The schematic illustration of treatment process for tumor. B) The immunoﬂuorescence
staining of oxygen content in tumor site of 4T1 tumor bearing mice with PBS and VI@R-T treatment with US. C) Change of body weight and D) tumor
volume of 4T1 tumor bearing mice with diﬀerent treatment. E) Change of tumor volume in diﬀerent parallel treatment groups. F) Tumor quality analysis
of 4T1 tumor bearing mice with diﬀerent treatment. G) The white light graph of tumor. H) H&E stained section and enlarged image of tumor in each
group. I) TUNEL immunoﬂuorescence staining.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2504404
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2504404 (13 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202504404 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
intensity of HIF-1𝛼was weakened, which might be due to the ul-
trasound treatment could enhance the local blood circulation of
the tumor, thereby improving the ischemic and hypoxic state of
the cancer cell. When the tumor volume of 4T1 tumor-bearing
mice reached ≈75 mm3, they were randomly divided into ﬁve
groups (n = 5) and subjected to diﬀerent treatments: (I) PBS,
(II) PBS+US, (III) V@R-T, (IV) I@R-T+US, (V) VI@R-T+US;
Previous studies in our laboratory have shown that the single
treatment of SDT had limited eﬀect, so in vivo anti-tumor ex-
periment, the nanocarrier was injected three times and ultra-
sonic stimulation was applied to the tumor at 3 and 6 h accord-
ing to the ﬂuorescence imaging.[16] During the experiment, the
change of body weight and tumor volume were measured every
other day in each group, and the tumor treatment eﬀect was com-
prehensively evaluated. The result demonstrated that the body
weight of the mice in each group did not show any signiﬁcant
change during the observation period, suggesting that the in-
jected nanocarrier and ultrasound stimulation did not cause any
signiﬁcant damage to the mice (Figure 7C). The tumor volume
of each treatment group showed that compared with the con-
trol group, the tumor volume growth rate of the multiple ul-
trasound treatment group was slower, which might be due to
the fact that the local heat generated at the tumor site by mul-
tiple ultrasound treatment suppressed the rapid growth of the
tumor to a certain extent (Figure 7D,E). However, the growth
rate of tumor volume in the V@R-T treatment group was even
slower, and there was a signiﬁcant diﬀerence compared with the
control group (p<0.01), which was due to the CDT eﬀect of the
nanocarrier on the tumor site. After injection of I@R-T nanocar-
rier and ultrasound stimulation, the tumor volume growth rate
of mice slowed down during the treatment period, but the tu-
mor volume continued to increase with the extension of time,
which was due to the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide by
natural enzyme of the erythrocyte membrane in the nanocar-
rier alleviated oxygen deﬁciency and enhanced the eﬀect of son-
odynamic therapy. However, the eﬀect of sonodynamic therapy
in the treatment group was still limited, and the tumor growth
could not be completely inhibited. While the VI@R-T+US treat-
ment group had the best tumor inhibition eﬀect, and the tumor
growth rate was slower than that of the single treatment group,
which was because vanadium-based nanozyme synergistically al-
leviated intratumor hypoxia and showed stronger sonodynamic
eﬀect and CDT eﬀect in response to TME, and there was very sig-
niﬁcant compared to CDT and SDT treatment group (p<0.001).
At the end of the observation period, the quality analysis and
white light map after stripping tumor of mice with diﬀerent treat-
ment groups also showed that the therapeutic eﬀect of the syn-
ergistic treatment group VI@R-T+US treatment group had the
most excellent therapeutic eﬀect (Figure 7F,G). Meanwhile, the
white light map of mice photographed at diﬀerent days in each
group during the observation period further illustrated the eﬀec-
tive therapeutic eﬀect of the nanocarrier (Figure S17, Supporting
Information).
In brief, the in vivo therapeutic evaluation analysis showed
that the tumor volume inhibition rate of nanocarrier coated with
vanadium-based nanozyme (V@R-T) was ≈33.9% (Figure 7),
that of nanocarrier coated with sonosensitizer ICG (I@R-T) was
≈47.5%, and that of nanocarrier coated with vanadium-based en-
zyme and sonosensitizer ICG (VI@R-T) was ≈67.1%. The syn-
ergistic eﬀect is slightly smaller than the additive eﬀect of the
two alone. The analysis of the inhibition rate of the stripped
tumor also showed that the tumor inhibition rate of V@R-
T was 30.7%, that of I@R-T was 43.8%, and that of VI@R-
T was 67%. Similarly, the nanocarrier coated with both sub-
stances had slightly lower tumor inhibition than the additive ef-
fect of both alone. These results indicate that while nanozyme
encapsulation inevitably inﬂuences the sonodynamic therapeu-
tic eﬃcacy, the combination therapy group still achieved signiﬁ-
cantly higher tumor suppression than either monotherapy group
(p<0.001).
In addition, the H&E and TUNEL staining were also per-
formed on tumor of mice in diﬀerent treatment groups to further
explore the therapeutic eﬀect of nanocarrier. The result demon-
strated that a small number of apoptotic cell also appeared in
the ultrasound treatment group, which might be due to the
local thermal eﬀect caused by multiple ultrasonic stimulation
(Figure 7H). It was also observed that apoptotic cell was more
pronounced in the V@R-T and I@R-T+US nanocarrier treat-
ment groups, indicating that both chemodynamic and sonody-
namic therapy alone had some therapeutic eﬀect at the initial
stage of treatment, whereas the synergistic VI@R-T+US treat-
ment group exhibited a large number of apoptotic tumor cell af-
ter the nanocarrier was enriched to the tumor and stimulated by
ultrasound. The TUNEL staining also further veriﬁed that the cell
apoptosis was most obvious in the VI@R-T+US treatment group
and showed strong green ﬂuorescence, which also indicated that
chemodynamic cooperated with sonodynamic therapy showed
the best therapeutic eﬀect (Figure 7I). In summary, the ef-
fect of chemodynamic therapy combined with sonodynamic
therapy was signiﬁcantly better than that of single ther-
apy. The multifunctional nanocarrier VI@R-T showed excel-
lent biocompatibility in mice and achieved good therapeu-
tic eﬀect, providing a new idea for designing eﬀective strat-
egy for alleviating tumor hypoxia and enhancing sonodynamic
therapy.
3. Conclusion
In this paper, a mitochondria-targeted erythrocyte vesicle
nanocarrier loaded with vanadium-based nanozyme VOx and
sonosensitizer ICG was developed as a biomimetic nanoplatform
for ROS-based therapy, which eﬀectively alleviated hypoxia of tu-
mor and achieved an enhanced combination of CDT and SDT
eﬀect for tumor. The nanocarrier was targeted to the energy sup-
plying organelle mitochondria, while vanadium-based nanozyme
with NOX mimetic enzyme activity depleted NADH, aﬀecting
the intracellular NADH/FAD balance and damaging the electron
transport chain, inhibiting mitochondrial respiration and thus
reducing intracellular oxygen consumption. Meanwhile, erythro-
cyte vesicle could also catalyze the decomposition of high level of
H2O2 in the TME to produce oxygen, which synergistically allevi-
ated the hypoxia in tumor for oxygen supply during the ultrason-
odynamic therapy. In addition, vanadium-based nanozyme VOx
also exhibited excellent POD mimic enzyme activity and gener-
ated ∙OH through the Fenton-like reaction under weakly acidic
condition, thus increased ROS level for synergistic tumor cell
killing. In this work, change of relative content of NADH/FAD
in tumor tissue was also monitored, and the nanocarrier could
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2504404
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2504404 (14 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202504404 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
alleviate oxygen deﬁciency and improve oxygen metabolism in
the tumor site, and achieved the purpose of enhancing SDT and
CDT therapy.
4. Experimental Section
Materials:
Vanadium pentoxide (V2O5), indocyanine green (ICG)
were purchased from Shanghai Macklin Biochemical Co., LTD. Citrate,
acetone, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and nitric acid were purchased from
Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., LTD. 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine
(TMB), reduced Coenzyme I (NADH), (3-propyl carboxylic) triphenyl
phosphine bromide (TPP), thiazolium blue tetrazolium bromide (MTT)
and sodium borohydride (NaBH4) were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich; 1,
2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanolamine-N-PEG2000-NH2
(DSPE-
mPEG2000-NH2)
was
purchased
from
Xi’an
Ruixi
Biotechnology
Co., LTD. Annexin V, FITC apoptosis detection kit was purchased
from Tongren Chemical Research Institute (Dojindo Laboratories);
Hoechst 33 342, Calcein-AM and PI staining, Mito-Tracker Green, 2,7-
Dichlorodihydroﬂuorescein diacetate (DCFH-DA), NAD+/NADH assay
kit, ATP assay kit, Mitochondrial membrane potential assay kit (JC-1) were
purchased from Beyotime Biotechnology. All the reagents used in the
experiment were all of analytical grade and used directly without further
puriﬁcation. The water used was ultrapure water (18.2 mΩ∙cm) produced
by Milli-Q system. Female Balb/C mice (6 weeks, 18–22 g) was purchased
from Beijing Hua Fu Kang Biotechnology Co., Ltd.
Characterizations:
The morphology of nanocarrier was characterized
by HT7700 transmission electron microscope (TEM) (Hitachi, Japan). The
hydrated particle size and zeta potential of the nanocarrier were measured
on Nano-ZS90 nanometer (Malvern, UK). The functional group of the ma-
terial was measured by Vertex 70 type infrared spectrometer (Bruker, Ger-
many). The absorption spectrum was recorded by UV-2550 UV–vis spec-
trophotometer (Shimadzu, Japan). WED-100 ultrasonic treatment appara-
tus (Welld, China) was used as the ultrasonic trigger source. The elemental
composition of nanocarrier was analyzed by AXIS-ULTRA DLD-600 W X-ray
photoelectron spectra (XPS) (Shimadzu, Japan). The ﬂuorescence imag-
ing of cell was conducted on IX-71 and Ti-2 inverted ﬂuorescent micro-
scope and FV3000 confocal microscope (Olympus, Japan). Flow cytometry
apoptosis assay and quantitative analysis of ﬂuorescence were measured
by Cyto Flex ﬂow cytometer (Beckman Coulter, USA). The in vivo ﬂuores-
cence imaging was performed on AniView100 multi-mode animal in IVIS
imaging system (BLT, China). The in vivo NADH/FAD deep-hypothermia
ﬂuorescence detection system was constructed by the laboratory.[45]
Preparation of VI@R-T. Synthesis of DSPE-mPEG2000-TPP:
Covalent
linkage between TPP and phospholipid: 5 mg (3-propanecarboxy)
triphenylphosphonium bromide Triphenylphosphonium bromide (TPP),
13.275 mg EDC and 8.25 mg NHS were activated in 2 mL of MES so-
lution for 1 h. Then, NaOH was added to adjust the pH to 8, 16.25 mg
DSPE-mPEG2000-NH2 was added and stirred for 12 h. The solution was
transferred into a dialysis bag (Mw = 2000 Da) and dialyzed in ultrapure
water for 2 days. Finally, the product was freeze-dried and stored at −20 °C
for subsequent experiments.
Extraction of erythrocyte membrane (RBCM). The traditional hypotonic
method was used to extract RBCM. The speciﬁc steps were as follows: the
whole blood from female Balb/C mice was centrifuged at 3500 rpm for
5 min at 4 °C to remove the plasma, and washed three times with pre-
cooled phosphate buﬀer solution (PBS), then lysed in hypotonic buﬀer
(0.25×PBS) at 4 °C for 4 h and washed several times with pre-cooled PBS
until the supernatant was clear and transparent. The collected red blood
cell shadow was broken in the ultrasonic crusher (25 kHz, 100 W) and
then suspended in PBS. Then, the solution was extruded by Avanti micro
extruder (400 and 100 nm polycarbonate porous membrane) for 40 times
to obtain uniform erythrocyte vesicle.
Synthesis of R-TPP. Mitochondria-targeted phospholipid insertion into
erythrocyte membrane: TPP-conjugated phospholipid (DSPE-mPEG2000-
TPP) was embedded in erythrocyte membrane vesicle by a post-insertion
method based on previous work.[46] The DSPE-mPEG2000-TPP was added
to the erythrocyte vesicle and stirred at 4 °C for 4 h, and centrifuged
at 11 000 rpm for 15 min, and washed twice with PBS to remove free
DSPE-mPEG2000-TPP, resulting in DSPE-mPEG2000-TPP-modiﬁed erythro-
cyte vesicle (R-T).
Synthesis of vanadium-based nanoenzyme VOx. First, VOx was syn-
thesised according to the references with slight modiﬁcations.[47] V2O5
(0.073 m, 20 mL) and citrate (0.15 m, 10 mL) were added sequentially
and stirred at room temperature, and NaBH4 (1.1 m, 10 mL) was injected
into the solution quickly after mixing, and the color changed to brownish
green. After stirring for 4 h, the product was centrifuged at 11 000 rpm for
10 min to remove unreacted impurity, and then centrifuged at 11 000 rpm
for 10 min with two times volume of acetone to remove the precipitate,
and then centrifuged the precipitate with 2:1 acetone and ultrapure water
for two times to obtain the vanadium-based nanozyme VOx.
Synthesis of VI@R-T. 1 mL of TPP-modiﬁed erythrocyte vesicle (RBC-T)
(1 mg mL−1), 0.5 mL of VOx nanozyme (2 mg mL−1), and 0.5 mL of ICG
(1 mg mL−1) were mixed and stirred for 4 h at 4 °C, and then the solution
was successively extruded through 400 and 100 nm polycarbonate porous
membrane for 40 times by using Avanti micro-extruder and centrifuged for
several time. After centrifugation with ultrapure water for several times, the
supernatant was colorless to obtain VI@R-T, and then the centrifuged so-
lution was collected and lyophilized and stored at 4 °C. The same method
was used to obtain V@R-T and I@R-T.
Stability of VI@R-T:
VI@R-T was stored in ultrapure water, PBS, NaCl,
DMEM, DMEM+10% FBS, and the hydrated particle size was determined.
In addition, VI@R-T dispersed in ultra-pure water was placed at 4 °C,
25 °C, and 37 °C, respectively, and its hydration particle size and poly-
dispersion coeﬃcient (PDI) were determined at 0, 4, 8, 12, 24, 48, 72, 96,
and 120 h to evaluate the long-term stability of VI@R-T nanocarrier.
Evaluation of Oxygen Generation Capacity of H2O2 Catalyzed by VI@R-T
Nanocarrier:
JPB-607A portable dissolved oxygen meter was used to de-
tect the oxygen content produced by nanocarrier. Nanocarrier VI@R-T was
placed in 5 mL PBS and continuously deoxygenated by passing argon gas
until the concentration of dissolved oxygen in the solution decreased to
0 mg mL−1. The ability of the nanocarrier VI@R-T (25 μg mL−1) catalyzing
H2O2 (1 mm) to produce oxygen was investigated under diﬀerent condi-
tion. At the same time, the eﬀect of catalyzing diﬀerent concentration of
H2O2 (0, 0.5, 1, 2.5, and 5 mm) and storage at neutral and weakly acidic
condition (pH 7.4, pH 6.5) for 3 and 12 h on the oxygen generation of
nanocarrier were also investigated.
Enzyme Catalytic Activity of the Nanocarrier V@R-T:
First, the UV–vis
absorption spectrum of TMB was detected by the classical colorimet-
ric method to determine whether V@R-T possessed POD mimetic en-
zyme activity of producing ∙OH. In brief, V@R-T (25 μg mL−1) was im-
mersed in phosphate buﬀer of pH 7.4 and pH 6.5. Then, H2O2 (1 mm)
and TMB (50 μm) was added to determine the change of absorption in-
tensity in diﬀerent groups. In addition, the production of ∙OH by dif-
ferent concentration of V@R-T (25, 50, 75, 100, and 200 μg mL−1) and
diﬀerent concentration of H2O2 (0.5, 1, 2.5, 4, and 5 mm) was also
investigated.
Next, the NOX mimetic enzyme activity of V@R-T was also assessed
by UV–vis absorption spectroscopy. Brieﬂy, V@R-T (12.5 μg mL−1) was
mixed with NADH (50 μg mL−1), in which the same concentration of R-
T (12.5 μg mL−1) was selected as the control group, the change of ab-
sorption intensity of the system was measured at diﬀerent time. Diﬀerent
concentration of nanocarrier V@R-T (12.5, 25, 37.5, and 50 μg mL−1) was
used to determine the absorption change at 340 nm.
Cellular Uptake of the Nanocarrier VI@R-T:
4T1 cell was inoculated
into confocal dish for overnight culture. After removing the medium, 1 mL
serum-free medium containing VI@R-T (50 μg mL−1, 18 μg VOx, and 6 μg
ICG) was added and incubated for 1, 2, 4, and 6 h. The cell was washed
three times with PBS and stained with DAPI for 10 min, then observed
and photographed under laser confocal scanning microscopic imaging
system. Meanwhile, 4T1 cell was inoculated into 6-well plate for overnight
incubation, and after removing the medium, and 1 mL serum-free medium
containing VI@R-T (50 μg mL−1) was added and incubated for 1, 2, 4, and
6 h respectively, and then the 10 000 cells were collected and analyzed of
ICG ﬂuorescence intensity by Cytoﬂex ﬂow cytometer.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2504404
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2504404 (15 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202504404 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
Mitochondrial Colocalization Microscopic Imaging of the Nanocarrier
VI@R-T:
4T1 cell was inoculated into confocal dish for overnight culture.
After removing the medium, 1 mL serum-free medium containing VI@R-T
and VI@R (50 μg mL−1, 18 μg VOx, and 6 μg ICG) was added and incu-
bated for 6 h. The cell was washed three times with PBS and stained with
Mito-Tracker Green for 30 min, Hoechst 33 342 was stained for 10 min
and then observed and photographed under laser confocal scanning mi-
croscopic imaging system.
Detection of Intracellular ROS by VI@R-T:
Intracellular ROS was de-
tected by DCFH-DA. 4T1 cell was inoculated into 6-well plate for overnight
culture. After removing the medium, 1 mL serum-free medium containing
the same concentration V@R-T, I@R-T, VI@R-T (50 μg mL−1, 18 μg VOx,
and 6 μg ICG) was added and incubated for 6 h. After washing three times
with PBS, serum-free medium with DCFH-DA (10 μm) was added and in-
cubated for 30 min. Afterward, three groups of cells were treated with ul-
trasonic wave (1.0 W cm−2) for 3 min, and then photographed under ﬂu-
orescence microscope. Meanwhile, the cell was collected under the same
condition and analyzed for the ﬂuorescence intensity of DCF in 10 000 cells
by Cytoﬂex ﬂow cytometry.
Hemolysis Study of VI@R-T:
A total of 2 mL of fresh blood from 6-
week-old female Balb/C mice was placed in EDTA k2 anticoagulant tube.
After repeated cleaning and centrifugation with PBS, red blood cell was ob-
tained and then resuspended in 10 mL of PBS. Diﬀerent concentration of
VI@R-T (0.07, 0.13, 0.25, 0.5, and 1 mg mL−1) was added to equal amount
of erythrocyte suspension, and the PBS and ultrapure water groups were
set as negative and positive control groups, with three parallels in each
group. After 1 and 6 h culture in 5% CO2 incubator, the supernatant was
taken into 96-well plate and the absorption value at 570 nm was measured
by microplate reader. Finally, cell precipitate of the ultrapure water group,
PBS group and VI@R-T (0.5 and 0.07 mg mL−1) group were prepared into
cell smear and the morphology of the erythrocyte was observed by micro-
scope. All animal experiments were approved by the Animal Experimen-
tal Ethics Committee of Huazhong University of Science and Technology
(IACUC Number: 4208).
The hemolysis rate (%) = (ODsample −ODPBS
) ∕
(ODwater −ODPBS) × 100%
(1)
In Vitro Cytotoxicity of Nanocarrier VI@R-T:
The cell toxicity was de-
termined by MTT assay. For normal cells, 3T3 and L929 cells of logarith-
mic growth stage were inoculated into 96-well plate for overnight culture
and then removed from the media. Five parallel samples were set in each
group, and 200 μL serum-free medium containing diﬀerent concentration
of VI@R-T (0, 6.25, 12.5, 25, 50, and 100 μg mL−1) was added and cultured
for 12 h, the above medium was removed and cleaned three times with
PBS, and each well was continued to be cultured with complete medium
for 12 h. Afterward, 20 μL thiazolium blue (5 mg mL−1) was added and
cultured for another 4 h, which was discarded and added 150 μL DMSO.
Finally, the plate was shaken slowly for 20 min and the cell viability was de-
termined by measuring the absorbance at 490 nm with microplate reader.
Cell viability (%) = (experimental group −blank group) ∕
(control group −blank group)
(2)
The toxicity of nanocarrier R-T on 4T1 cell was also calculated by the
same assay.
In Vitro Synergistic Therapy of Nanocarrier VI@R-T:
The synergistic
therapeutic eﬀect of VI@R-T on 4T1 cell was also determined by MTT
assay. 4T1 cell was incubated with serum-free medium containing diﬀer-
ent concentration of VI@R-T (0, 6.25, 12.5, 25, 50, and 100 μg mL−1) for
6 h, washed with PBS for three times and treated with ultrasonic wave
(1.0 W cm−2) for 3 min and the each well was cultured with the com-
plete medium for 18 h. Afterward, 20 μL thiazolium blue (5 mg mL−1) was
added and cultured for another 4 h, which was discarded and added 150 μL
DMSO. Finally, the plate was shaken slowly for 20 min and the cell viability
was determined by measuring the absorbance at 490 nm with microplate
reader.
Intracellular NADH Content Assay:
4T1 cell was inoculated into 6-well
plate for overnight culture. After removing the medium, 1 mL serum-
free medium containing diﬀerent concentration of V@R-T (12.5, 25, and
50 μg mL−1) was added and incubated for 6 h. After washing three times
with PBS, and the relative NADH content was determine according to the
NAD+/NADH assay kit.
Intracellular ATP Content Assay:
4T1 cell was inoculated into 6-well
plate for overnight culture. After removing the medium, 1 mL serum-
free medium containing diﬀerent concentration of V@R-T (12.5, 25, and
50 μg mL−1) was added and incubated for 6 h. After washing three times
with PBS, and the relative NADH content was determine according to the
ATP assay kit.
Intracellular Oxygen Content Detection:
4T1 cell was inoculated into
6-well plate for overnight culture. After removing the medium, 1 mL
serum-free media containing the same concentration of R-T and V@R-T
(50 μg mL−1, 18 μg VOx, and 6 μg ICG) was added and incubated for 6 h.
Speciﬁcally, deferriamine (30 μm) was added and sealed with liquid wax to
simulate intracellular anaerobic environment. After washing three times
with PBS, serum-free medium with [Ru(dpp)3]Cl2 (30 μm) was added
and incubated for 30 min, and then photographed under ﬂuorescence
microscope.
Fluorescence Imaging of Intracellular JC-1 Staining:
Mitochondrial
membrane potential was measured by Mitochondrial Membrane Poten-
tial Detection Kit (JC-1). 4T1 cell was inoculated into 6-well plate and incu-
bated overnight. After removing the medium, 1 mL of serum-free medium
containing VI@R-T (50 μg mL−1, 18 μg VOx, and 6 μg ICG) was added
and incubated for 6 h. After washing three times with PBS, the cell was
treated with ultrasonic wave (1.0 W cm−2) for 3 min, and 1 mL JC-1 dye
solution was added to each well and incubated for 20 min. Then, the cell
was washed twice with JC-1 dye buﬀer and observed under ﬂuorescence
microscope.
Intracellular Dead and Alive Staining Analysis:
4T1 cell was inoculated
into 6-well plate and incubated overnight. After removing the medium,
1 mL of serum-free medium containing VI@R-T (50 μg mL−1, 18 μg VOx,
and 6 μg ICG) was added and incubated for 6 h. After washing three
times with PBS, the two groups of cells were treated with ultrasonic wave
(1.0 W cm−2) for 3 min, and then stained with Calcein-AM and PI staining
solution for 5 min, and the staining solution was removed and cleaned
with PBS for three times, then observed under ﬂuorescence microscope.
For the ﬂow apoptosis experiment, Annexin V-FITC/PI apoptosis staining
solution was added into each well successively under the same treatment
condition for 15 min. After washing three times with PBS, 10 000 cells were
quantiﬁcationally analyzed for apoptosis by ﬂow cytometer.
Migration Inhibition Assay of 4T1 cell by VI@R-T:
Before the cell was
inoculated in 12-well plate, two parallel lines were drawn in the center of
each hole at the bottom of the plate with a marker, and 4T1 cell was inoc-
ulated in 12-well plate and cultured overnight, and the tip of the gun was
scratched perpendicularly to the two parallel lines mentioned above with
a ruler, and the scratches were kept consistent in each well. After wash-
ing three times with PBS, 1 mL of complete medium containing VI@R-T
(12.5, 25, and 37.5 μg mL−1) was added and photographed under the mi-
croscope at 0, 8, 24, 36, and 48 h.
In Vivo Toxicity Assay of VI@R-T:
The 6-week-old female Balb/C mice
were randomly divided into three groups: single tail vein injection group
(injection with once nanocarrier and observation for one day), multiple tail
vein injection group (injection with three times every three days for obser-
vation 30 days) (2 mg mL−1) and control group (injection with PBS). At
the end of the observation period, the mice in each group were weighed,
then the mice were sacriﬁced and blood was collected for detection blood
routine and blood biochemical indexes. At the same time, the heart, liver,
spleen and lungs of each group of mice were stripped and weighed to cal-
culate the organ index, and then ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde, paraﬃn
embedded, sliced and H&E staining was performed.
Organ index = organ weight∕mouse weight × 100%
(3)
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2504404
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2504404 (16 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202504404 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
In Vivo Fluorescence Imaging of VI@R-T:
6-week-old female Balb/C
mice were subcutaneously inoculated with 4T1 cell (106) to construct
the subcutaneous breast cancer tumor model. When the tumor volume
reached ≈100 mm3, free drug ICG and VI@R-T (20 mg kg−1) containing
equal amount of ICG were injected into the tumor-bearing mice through
the tail vein, the in vivo ﬂuorescence imaging was performed continuously
on anesthetized mice at diﬀerent time (0, 3, 6, 9, 12, 24, and 48 h) by IVIS
imaging system. At 6 h and 12 h after injection of free drug ICG and VI@R-
T, the mice were euthanized and the main organs and tumors were taken,
washed several times with PBS, and then imaged by the IVIS ﬂuorescence
imaging system. In addition, mice injected with nanocarrier for 0, 4, 8,
and 12 h were taken to strip the tumors and quickly placed in liquid nitro-
gen for NADH/FAD imaging in the deep cryogenic two/three-dimensional
autoﬂuorescence imaging system built by the laboratory.
In Vivo Synergistic Therapy of VI@R-T:
6-week-old female Balb/C mice
were inoculated with 4T1 cell. When the tumor volume reached ≈75 mm3,
the tumor-bearing mice were randomly divided into 5 groups, respectively
(I) PBS, (II) PBS+US, (III) V@R-T, (IV) I@R-T+US, (V) VI@R-T+US; Dif-
ferent kind of nanocarrier (20 mg kg−1) was injected through the tail vein
at day 0, 3 and 6 of the treatment period, and the tumor was stimulated by
ultrasound (1 W cm−2 and 5 min) in groups II, IV, and V at 3 and 6 h after
injection with nanocarrier. In addition, one mouse in each group was eu-
thanized and the tumor was collected. After washed with PBS, the tumor
was immersed in 4% paraformaldehyde and ﬁxed to make slices for H&E
and TUNEL staining, respectively. Meanwhile, the weight and tumor vol-
ume change of each group of mice were recorded by digital Vernier caliper
and scale every two days. At day 14, the mice were euthanized, the tumors
were stripped and weighed, and the tumor mass was calculated and pho-
tographed.
Statistical Analysis:
At least three parallels were set in all experiments,
and all statistics were calculated by two-tailed t-test (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01,
***p < 0.001).
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or from
the author.
Acknowledgements
F.Z., and Y.-G.H. contributed equally to this work. This work was sup-
ported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos.
62305121, 62375093), and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation
Funded Project (Grant No. 2023T160247), Technology Innovation Pro-
gram of Hubei Province (2024BCB058), China Ageing Development Foun-
dation - Elderly Navigation Program Research Fund (193). The authors
also thank the Analytical and Testing Center (HUST), the Research Core
Facilities for Life Science (HUST) for the help of measurement.
Conﬂict of Interest
The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the fundings of this study are available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Keywords
mitochondria-targeted, red blood cell membrane, sonodynamic therapy,
tumor hypoxia relief, vanadium-based nanozyme
Received: February 18, 2025
Revised: April 8, 2025
Published online: May 30, 2025
[1] L. Sun, J. Zhou, T. Luo, J. Wang, L. Kang, Y. Wang, S. Luo, Z.
Wang, Z. Zhou, J. Zhu, J. Yu, L. Yu, Z. Yan, Adv. Mater. 2022, 34,
2109969.
[2] Y. Zhao, S. Wang, Y. Ding, Z. Zhang, T. Huang, Y. Zhang, X. Wan, Z.
L. Wang, L. Li, ACS Nano 2022, 16, 9304.
[3] Y. Wang, F. Gong, Z. Han, H. Lei, Y. Zhou, S. Cheng, X. Yang, T. Wang,
L. Wang, N. Yang, Z. Liu, L. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2023, 62,
202215467.
[4] P. Huang, X. Qian, Y. Chen, L. Yu, H. Lin, L. Wang, Y. Zhu, J. Shi, J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139, 1275.
[5] D. W. Felsher, Nat. Rev. Cancer 2003, 3, 375.
[6] H. Huang, Y. Zheng, M. Chang, J. Song, L. Xia, C. Wu, W. Jia, H. Ren,
W. Feng, Y. Chen, Chem. Rev. 2024, 124, 8307.
[7] M. Yang, X. Wang, M. Peng, F. Wang, S. Hou, R. Xing, A. Chen, Nano-
Micro Lett. 2025, 17, 157.
[8] S. Liang, X. Deng, P. Ma, Z. Cheng, J. Lin, Adv. Mater. 2020, 32,
2003214.
[9] Y. Zhou, Q. Li, Y. Wu, W. Zhang, L. Ding, C. Ji, P. Li, T. Chen, L. Feng,
B. Z. Tang, X. Huang, Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2313953.
[10] N. Yang, C. Cao, X. Lv, T. Zhang, J. Shao, X. Song, W. Wang, P. Chen,
W. Huang, X. Dong, BMEMat 2023, 1, 12005.
[11] Y. Zhu, X. Wang, L. Feng, R. Zhao, C. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Xie, B. Liu, Y. Zhou,
P. Yang, Nat. Commun. 2024, 15, 8696.
[12] N. C. Denko, Nat. Rev. Cancer 2008, 8, 705.
[13] C. Li, X. Yang, J. An, K. Cheng, X. Hou, X. Zhang, Y. Hu, B. Liu, Y. Zhao,
Theranostics 2020, 10, 867.
[14] D. Wang, H. Wu, S. Zeng, F. Phua, G. Yang, W. Q. Lim, L. Gu, C.
Qian, H. Wang, Z. Guo, H. Chen, Y. Zhao, Nat. Commun. 2020, 11,
357.
[15] N. A. Bonekamp, B. Peter, H. S. Hillen, A. Felser, T. Bergbrede, A.
Choidas, M. Horn, A. Unger, R. Di Lucrezia, I. Atanassov, X. Li,
U. Koch, S. Menninger, J. Boros, P. Habenberger, P. Giavalisco, P.
Cramer, M. S. Denzel, P. Nussbaumer, B. Klebl, M. Falkenberg, C. M.
Gustafsson, N. G. Larsson, Nature 2020, 588, 712.
[16] X. Guo, N. Yang, W. Ji, H. Zhang, X. Dong, Z. Zhou, L. Li, H. M. Shen,
S. Q. Yao, W. Huang, Adv. Mater. 2021, 33, 2007778.
[17] D. Wang, W. Wang, L. Fang, L. Qi, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, Y. Liang, H. Yang,
M. Wang, X. Wei, R. Jiang, Y. Liu, W. Zhou, X. Fang, J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2023, 145, 12861.
[18] F. Tong, Y. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Zhou, S. He, Y. Du, W. Yang, T. Lei, Y. Song,
T. Gong, H. Gao, Nat. Commun. 2024, 15, 10382.
[19] L. Jiang, S. Zhou, X. Zhang, C. Li, S. Ji, H. Mao, X. Jiang, Nat. Commun.
2021, 12, 2390.
[20] D. D. Newmeyer, S. F. Miller, Cell 2003, 112, 481.
[21] S. Pal, A. Sharma, S. P. Mathew, B. G. Jaganathan, Front. Immunol.
2022, 13, 955476.
[22] H. Ding, J. Wei, L. Fang, L. Feng, S. Gai, F. He, L. Wu, Z. Rehman, P.
Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2024, 34, 2312429.
[23] Y. Dong, S. Dong, C. Yu, J. Liu, S. Gai, Y. Xie, Z. Zhao, X. Qin, L. Feng,
P. Yang, Y. Zhao, Sci. Adv. 2023, 9, adi9980.
[24] Q. Wang, X. Li, Z. Cao, W. Feng, Y. Chen, D. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2024, 146, 8228.
[25] K. Liang, F. Nan, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Li, X. Xue, T. Chen, Y. Hao, P.
Wang, J. Ge, Small 2024, 20, 2311027.
[26] R. Zhao, Y. Zhu, L. Feng, B. Liu, Y. Hu, H. Zhu, Z. Zhao, H. Ding, S.
Gai, P. Yang, Adv. Mater. 2024, 36, 2307115.
[27] K. Mouli, A. V. Liopo, E. A. McHugh, E. Underwood, J. Zhao, P. K.
Dash, A. T. T. Vo, V. Malojirao, M. Hegde, J. M. Tour, P. J. Derry, T. A.
Kent, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 2024, 14, 2401629.
[28] J. Li, L. Xie, W. Sang, W. Li, G. Wang, J. Yan, Z. Zhang, H. Tian, Q. Fan,
Y. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2022, 61, 202200830.
[29] J. Skoda, K. Borankova, P. J. Jansson, M. L. H. Huang, R. Veselska, D.
R. Richardson, Pharmacol. Res. 2019, 139, 298.
[30] I. Vercellino, L. A. Sazanov, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 2022, 23, 141.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2504404
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2504404 (17 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202504404 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.advancedsciencenews.com
www.afm-journal.de
[31] S. Son, J. H. Kim, X. Wang, C. Zhang, S. A. Yoon, J. Shin, A. Sharma,
M. H. Lee, L. Cheng, J. Wu, J. S. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2020, 49,
3244.
[32] M. Chang, M. Wang, M. Wang, M. Shu, B. Ding, C. Li, M. Pang, S.
Cui, Z. Hou, J. Lin, Adv. Mater. 2019, 31, 1905271.
[33] Z. Li, J. Han, L. Yu, X. Qian, H. Xing, H. Lin, M. Wu, T. Yang, Y. Chen,
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2018, 28, 1800145.
[34] X. Wang, X. Zhong, Z. Liu, L. Cheng, Nano Today 2020, 35,
100946.
[35] X. Fang, D. Yang, X. Wu, K. H. Lui, X. Li, W. S. Lo, C. Li, Y. Zhang, G.
Nie, L. Jiang, Y. Gu, B. Zhang, W. T. Wong, Chem. Eng. J. 2023, 474,
145675.
[36] W. He, J. Wu, J. Liu, J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2024, 34, 2312116.
[37] J. Wu, X. Wang, Q. Wang, Z. Lou, S. Li, Y. Zhu, L. Qin, H. Wei, Chem.
Soc. Rev. 2019, 48, 1004.
[38] Y. Zhu, R. Zhao, L. Feng, C. Wang, S. Dong, M. V. Zyuzin, A. Timin,
N. Hu, B. Liu, P. Yang, ACS Nano 2023, 17, 6833.
[39] Y. Huang, J. Ren, X. Qu, Chem. Rev. 2019, 119, 4357.
[40] R. André, F. Natálio, M. Humanes, J. Leppin, K. Heinze, R. Wever, H.
C. Schröder, W. E. G. Müller, W. Tremel, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2011, 21,
501.
[41] F. Natalio, R. André, A. F. Hartog, B. Stoll, K. P. Jochum, R. Wever, W.
Tremel, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2012, 7, 530.
[42] W. Ma, J. Liu, Y. Xin, X. Yang, R. Li, X. Ding, Y. Niu, Y. Xu, Microchem.
J. 2020, 153, 104352.
[43] A. Rakshit, M. Mukherjee, S. Chakraborty, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Pro-
cess. 2018, 88, 127.
[44] C. Liang, J. Xie, S. Luo, C. Huang, Q. Zhang, H. Huang, P. Zhang,
Nat. Commun. 2021, 12, 5001.
[45] K. Cheng, B. Liu, X. Zhang, R. Zhang, F. Zhang, G. Ashraf, G. Fan, M.
Tian, X. Sun, J. Yuan, Y. Zhao, Nat. Commun. 2022, 13, 4567.
[46] Z. Chai, D. Ran, L. Lu, C. Zhan, H. Ruan, X. Hu, C. Xie, K. Jiang, J. Li,
J. Zhou, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, R. Fang, L. Zhang, W. Lu, ACS Nano 2019,
13, 5591.
[47] F. Mao, Y. Liu, L. Ma, L. Liu, A. Jiang, X. Zhai, J. Zhou, Biomaterials
2019, 194, 94.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2025, 35, 2504404
© 2025 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2504404 (18 of 18)
 16163028, 2025, 46, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202504404 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [27/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License