Chen et al. NPG Asia Materials (2020) 12:56
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41427-020-00239-y
NPG Asia Materials
A R T I C L E
O p e n A c c e s s
Amphiphilic silver nanoclusters show active
nano–bio interaction with compelling antibacterial
activity against multidrug-resistant bacteria
Yongjiu Chen1,2, Liting Ren1,3, Lingxiao Sun4, Xuan Bai2,5, Guoqiang Zhuang1,2, Bin Cao4, Guoqing Hu6,
Nanfeng Zheng
3 and Sijin Liu
1,2
Abstract
Multidrug resistance represents a growing threat to human beings, and alternative antimicrobial regimens to
conventional antibiotic paradigms are being extensively searched to ﬁght against multidrug-resistant bacteria (MDRB).
Although the antimicrobial potency of silver nanomaterials (AgNMs) has been previously elaborated, their efﬁcacy
against MDRB still remains to be strengthened. Here, our data revealed that small-sized silver nanoclusters (AgNCs) are
superior to conventional silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) as robust antimicrobials against multidrug-resistant (MDR)
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa). The core structure and surface ligands of AgNCs are crucial for the
outstanding antibacterial activity of AgNCs. On the one hand, due to the presence of amphiphilic ligands, AgNCs are
relatively prone to associate with the cell membrane and partake in endocytosis with targeted bacterial cells.
Molecular dynamics simulations also corroborated this ﬁnding. On the other hand, the nanocluster structure of AgNCs
led to strong peroxidase-like activity associated with massive production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which
contributes to their overall bactericidal potency. These outstanding features of AgNCs result in elevated bacterial
killing efﬁcacy by impairing the cell wall/membrane, promoting oxidative stress and attenuating pivotal cellular
processes, e.g., ATP synthesis. Notably, AgNCs manifested great efﬁcacy in treating P. aeruginosa-generated
pneumonia in mice and increased the survival of infected animals, as well as exhibited excellent biocompatibility.
Taken together, the results of this study pinpoint the great promise of AgNCs as new alternative therapeutics against
MDR P. aeruginosa.
Introduction
Multidrug-resistant bacteria (MDRB) are more perni-
cious than their precursory, drug-susceptible strains, as
they can survive attack from most drugs relative to. Thus,
it is clinically difﬁcult to eradicate MDRB due to their
resistance to a wide spectrum of antibiotics. According to
the World Health Organization (WHO), the number of
MDRB has been increasing quickly in recent years,
incurring serious public health problems and bringing
about substantial economic burden1–3. In this context,
new drugs and innovative strategies are urgently needed
to combat MDRB. Thus far, numerous new therapeutics
have been explored to resist MDRB, e.g., nanomaterials.
In fact, a wide range of nanomaterials, including metallic
(e.g., silver4 and gold5 nanoparticles), nonmetallic (e.g.,
selenium nanoparticles6,7), metal oxide (e.g., titanium
dioxide8 and iron oxide9), and carbonaceous nanomater-
ials (e.g., graphene10) have been demonstrated to possess
multidrug-resistant (MDR) bactericidal effects. The fol-
lowing general mechanisms have been proposed for the
ability of nanomaterials to overcome antimicrobial resis-
tance. (i) Membrane damage: nanomaterials tend to
© The Author(s) 2020
OpenAccessThisarticleislicensedunderaCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0InternationalLicense,whichpermitsuse,sharing,adaptation,distributionandreproduction
in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain
permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
Correspondence: Nanfeng Zheng (nfzheng@xmu.edu.cn) or
Sijin Liu (sjliu@rcees.ac.cn)
1State Key Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology, Research
Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100085
Beijing, China
2University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100049 Beijing, China
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

rupture the cell structure and damage the cell mem-
brane11; (ii) reactive oxygen species (ROS) production:
many nanomaterials induce the production of ROS12,
which damage DNA and cause metabolic disorders13; (iii)
enzyme-mimicking
performance:
the
peroxidase-like
activity of nanomaterials such as palladium nanocrystals
and iron oxide enhances their bactericidal properties14;
(iv) ion dissolution: released ions, such as silver ions,
directly attack biomolecules, e.g., thiol-rich proteins; and
(v) eradication of the bioﬁlm: since bioﬁlm formation is an
important reason for drug resistance development, some
nanomaterials, such as metal oxide nanoparticles, could
eradicate bioﬁlms due to their strong redox reaction
capabilities that perturb cell metabolism15. Among all
types of nanomaterials, silver (Ag) nanomaterials repre-
sent a family of the most effective antimicrobial nano-
medicines with exceptionally wide applications16–19. To
date, the most prevalent form of Ag nanomaterials
(AgNMs) is Ag nanoparticles (AgNPs)4,20. Although a
wealth of past studies have evaluated the potency of
AgNPs
against
MDRB,
their
antimicrobial
efﬁcacy
remains to be strengthened, and drug resistance towards
AgNPs could likely form after repeated treatments4,21–26.
Thus, it is of great importance to augment Ag’s anti-
microbial
potency
through
various
physicochemical
improvements that would enable more active nano–bio
interactions and elicit greater stress on pathogens. In this
context, continuous efforts are being invested to look for
more potent AgNMs.
Strikingly, metal nanoclusters are becoming more
attractive because they exactly ﬁll in the gap between
small molecules (<1 nm) and conventional nanoparticles
(>3 nm)27–30. Recently, AgNCs have attracted extensive e
attention for various applications, such as in biomedi-
cine31. In addition to the essential difference in size
between AgNCs and AgNPs, the core is differently formed
because AgNCs are formed with the precise control of
their composition at the atomic level, which could not be
achieved in conventional AgNPs32,33. To this end, AgNCs
bear physicochemical properties superior to those of
conventional AgNPs, including substantial surface reac-
tivities towards exchange reactions, enabling versatile
solubility
in
different
media34.
Therefore,
advanced
nanocluster chemistry would empower diverse manip-
ulations of the type and composition of surface ligands on
AgNCs, giving rise to distinct AgNCs with precise size,
composition and surface properties33,35,36. In addition,
diverse surface ligands on AgNCs warrant their desirable
stability in various solutions and in biological set-
tings34,37,38. Additionally, owing to their atomically pre-
cise molecular structure, AgNCs offer an ideal platform to
understand the interaction between Ag and biological
molecules34,36,38. In this respect, these outstanding char-
acteristics, including amphiphilic modalities and active
nano–bio interactions, might also be utilized to combat
pathogens. Nonetheless, the antimicrobial potency of
AgNCs has scarcely been determined to date.
Although the antimicrobial efﬁcacy of AgNMs has been
found to correlate to many physicochemical properties,
e.g., size, core/shell material, and the nature of the surface
ligands
(which
dictate
solubility,
charge
and
stabi-
lity)4,24,25, most previous studies examined individual
properties, and no conclusive understandings have been
obtained regarding the preferential combination of these
properties. However, no quantitative informatic tools are
currently available to offer appreciable predictive power
for the design of desirable module incorporation. To
explore the parameters that exclusively dictate the anti-
microbial efﬁcacy of AgNMs, we sought to optimize the
contributions of size, surface hydrophilicity and hydro-
phobicity, and core fraction to determine the most sui-
table integration of multiple physicochemical properties.
We determined that small-sized amphiphilic silver clus-
ters, namely, AgNCs, are superior to conventional AgNPs,
showing active nano–bio interactions and outstanding
activity in combating MDR P. aeruginosa both in vitro
and in vivo.
Materials and methods
Chemicals and reagents
The chemicals and reagents used in the current study
include silver nitrate (Sinopharm, Shanghai, China), trie-
thylamine (Macklin, Shanghai, China), mercaptosuccinic
acid (Alfa Aesar, Shanghai, Beijing), 1-admantanethiol
(Sigma, St. Louis, USA), tetraphenylphosphonium bro-
mide (J&K Scientiﬁc, Beijing, China), N,N-dimethylforma-
mide (J&K Scientiﬁc, Beijing, China), sodium borohydride
(Sinopharm, Shanghai, China), dichloromethane (Sino-
pharm, Shanghai, China), absolute methanol (Sinopharm,
Shanghai, China), ammonia (Sinopharm, Shanghai, China),
ethanol absolute (Sinopharm, Shanghai, China), sodium
chloride
(Sinopharm,
Shanghai,
China),
triethylamine
(Macklin, Shanghai, China), tryptone (Oxoid, Basingstoke,
UK), yeast extract (Oxoid, Basingstoke, UK), agar power
(Solarbio, Beijing, China), dialysis membranes (Solarbio,
Beijing, China), DCFH-DA (Sigma, St. Louis, USA),
Hoechst 33342/PI (Solarbio, Beijing, China), D2000 DNA
marker (GenStar, Beijing, China), 2×Taq PCR StarMix with
loading dye (GenStar, Beijing, China), and Agarose G-10
(IOWEST, Chicago, USA).
Workﬂow for literature searching and data mining
As shown in Supplementary Fig. S1, we collected
research papers and extracted data according to the fol-
lowing steps:
a.
Literature search. All articles were searched by the
keywords “silver nanoparticles”, “nanosilver”, or “nAg”
and “antibacterial”, “antimicrobial” or “bactericidal”
Chen et al. NPG Asia Materials (2020) 12:56
Page 2 of 15

using the Web of Science (http://apps.webofknowledge.
com) and PubMed (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). A total of
>1700 publications were retrieved.
b.
Inclusion and exclusion criteria. Inclusion criteria: (1)
AgNMs were not doped; (2) the particle size was clearly
measured and <100 nm; (3) the antibacterial effect
evaluation was through conventional determination,
such as minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) value
and antibacterial efﬁciency determination; (4) AgNMs
was synthesized through chemical synthesis methods
with deﬁnite surface modiﬁcation; and (5) the bacterial
strains and sources were clearly described. Exclusion
criteria: (1) the development of nonsingle homogeneous
systems, such as textiles, pharmaceutical devices, gels,
alloys, plastics, and clothing, and (2) the use of green
synthetic
methods
resulting
in
unclear
surface
modiﬁcations. After combining the inclusion and
exclusion criteria, a total of 266 data sets from 36
research papers were collected.
c.
Data extraction: detailed information, including size,
surface ligand, surface charge, gram feature, bacterial
strain, exposure time, drug resistance and MIC values,
was extracted from 36 research papers.
Calculation of the importance for various properties via
random forest regression
To quantify the importance of complex and difﬁcult-to-
normalize attributes (e.g., surface ligands, strains, drug resis-
tance, etc.) affecting the MIC values, we employed an
advanced machine learning approach: the random forest
model (RF model)39,40. Here, the language package “ran-
domForest” of “R” was used, and the number of repetitions
was set at 200. The strategy of increasing the mean squared
error (MSE) was carried out to directly measure the impact of
each factor on the prediction accuracy of the RF model. The
principle was the rearrangement of the order of these factors
versus the reduction of the model accuracy. This method
indicated that the accuracy of the model was not affected by
less important factors, such as the gram feature, whereas the
accuracy of the model was greatly affected by important
indicators, such as size and surface ligands (Fig. 1a).
The classiﬁcation map (Fig. 1b) was generated with “R”,
where Gram-positive and Gram-negative features served
as the deﬁnition of two groups, the readout of bactericidal
efﬁcacy was the MIC value, and the color denoted the
differential size range of AgNMs. Additionally, to recog-
nize the correlation between particle size and MIC valued,
a general linear regression model (Fig. 1b) was used to ﬁt
the scatter points.
Synthesis of AgNCs and AgNPs (#1 and #2) and
characterization
AgNCs were synthesized in two steps, as previously
described33. First, the core of the AgNCs was synthesized
through a biphasic reaction. Second, the amphiphilic shell of
the AgNCs was subjected to ligand exchange with mercap-
tosuccinic acid (MSA) to obtain amphiphilic AgNCs. A
detailed description is provided as follows. Step 1: AgNO3
(60 mg) was dissolved in a mixed solvent of dichloromethane
and methanol in an ice bath. Thereafter, 1-adamantanethiol
(S-Adm) (15 mg) and tetraphenylphosphonium bromide
(12 mg) were added and vigorously stirred. After stirring for
20 min, 1 mL of an aqueous sodium borohydride (NaBH4)
solution (45 mg/mL) and 50 μL of triethylamine were
quickly added under vigorous stirring. Afterwards, the
reaction was aged for 12 h at 4 °C. The aqueous phase was
then gently removed, and the mixture in the organic phase
was washed several times with water. Dark green rhombic
crystals were crystallized from methylene chloride (CH2Cl2)
in a week. Step 2: MSA (0.8 mg) was added into a 1 mL
ethanol suspension of organophilic AgNCs (5 mg). After
stirring for 3 h at room temperature, concentrated ammonia
(6 μL) was added to precipitate AgNCs. Solid products were
separated by centrifugation, washed three times with etha-
nol, and ﬁnally dissolved in deionized water, followed by
characterization.
AgNPs #1 was made based on the following process.
Brieﬂy, AgNO3 (60 mg) was dissolved in 4 mL of N,N-
dimethylformamide in an ice bath. Then, MSA (13.50 mg)
and
tetraphenylphosphonium
bromide
(12 mg)
were
added and vigorously stirred. After stirring for 20 min,
1 mL of an aqueous NaBH4 solution (45 mg/mL) was
added into each reaction after 50 μL of triethylamine was
quickly added under stirring conditions. The reaction
was thereafter aged for 6 h at room temperature. AgNPs
with a uniform size were separated by centrifugation,
washed with water, and eventually dissolved in deionized
(DI) water. For the synthesis of AgNCs #2, MSA
(13.50 mg) was replaced by MSA (6.75 mg) and S-Adm
(7.50 mg); otherwise, the other steps were the same as the
synthesis for AgNPs #1.
AgNCs and AgNPs were characterized by transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) (JEM-2100F, Japan). Fourier
transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy was performed on
an iS50 FTIR spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, USA). The
ultraviolet (UV)−visible (Vis) spectra were acquired on a
UV–Vis spectrophotometer DU-800 (Backman, USA).
The zeta potential in water and culture medium was
measured with a dynamic light scattering (DLS) instru-
ment (Malvern, UK). The elemental composition of TEM-
analyzed
specimens
was
assessed
through
EDS
(OXFORD, London, UK).
Bacterial strains and growth determination
MDRB strains of P. aeruginosa, A. baumannii, and E.
coli were obtained and maintained with approval from the
inhouse ethics committee at the China-Japan Friendship
Hospital41,42, and their corresponding regular drug-
Chen et al. NPG Asia Materials (2020) 12:56
Page 3 of 15

susceptible strains were commercial strains acquired from
the ATCC. Bacterial cell growth and killing efﬁcacy were
determined through growth curves reﬂective of absorption
at OD600 and colony forming unit (CFU) counting accord-
ing to standard protocols, as described previously41,43. In the
current work, we repeatedly thawed the stored bacteria from
the parental lines to avoid secondary resistance.
Enzyme-like activity of AgNMs
For the TMB (3,3’,5,5’-tetramethylbenzidine) assay, an
aqueous solution of AgNPs or AgNCs was diluted to a
ﬁnal concentration of 51.20 μg/mL with DI water, and
then 100 μL of H2O2 (10 M) and 20 μL of TMB (100 mM
dissolved in DMSO) were added. The volume of the ﬁnal
reaction system was adjusted to 1 mL with DI water. After
Fig. 1 Design and synthesis of AgNMs against MDRB. a Importance of seven factors in dictating the MIC values (MSE: means squared error).
b Classes of size-determined effects on the survival of different bacterial strains as reﬂected by MIC values. Red represents a size <15 nm, green
indicates 15 to 30 nm, blue denotes 30 to 50 nm, and black represents 50 to 100 nm. c A schematic depicting the morphology and surface properties
of AgNPs (#1 and #2) and AgNCs, where –COOH represents mercaptosuccinic acid and -Adm denotes 1-admantanethiol. d Representative images of
AgNPs and AgNCs dissolved in water and CH2Cl2, reﬂective of their hydrophilic and amphiphilic features. e Absorption proﬁles of AgNPs #1, AgNPs
#2, and AgNCs.
Chen et al. NPG Asia Materials (2020) 12:56
Page 4 of 15

5 min, the absorbance curve was monitored by a UV–Vis
spectrophotometer (UNICO, UV-2800). DI water was
employed as the untreated control in TMB experiments.
For electron spin resonance (ESR) spectrum acquisition,
a 50 μL system (5 μL of 5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline n-oxide
(DMPO) (1 M), 5 μL of H2O2 (10 M), 5 μL of AgNPs or
AgNCs (484 μg/mL), and 35 μL of DI water) were sub-
jected to electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR, BRU-
KER, A300–10/12). DI water was employed as the
untreated control in both the TMB and ESR experiments.
Intercellular ROS and extracellular MDA assays
Intracellular ROS production was measured in bacterial
cells with a 2’, 7’-dichloroﬂuorescin diacetate (DCFH-DA)
probe following an established protocol, as previously
described44. Malondialdehyde (MDA), a product of lipid
peroxidation, was assayed by the thiobarbituric acid
(TBA) test, as previously described45, according to the
manufacturer’s instructions (Solarbio, Beijing, China).
Cellular ATP level test
The level of cellular ATP in MDR P. aeruginosa was
determined using a bioluminescence assay kit (Beyotime,
Shanghai, China). Brieﬂy, post-treatment, bacterial pellets
were lysed with lysis buffer in Lysing Matrix B tubes
(MPBio, CA, USA) and vortexed three times for 30 s with
incubation on ice at intervals, followed by centrifugation
at 12,000 × g for 5 min at 4 °C. Finally, 20 μL of super-
natant dispersed in DI water was mixed with 80 μL of
luciferase reagent, which catalyzed bioluminescence pro-
duction from ATP and luciferin. The emitted biolumi-
nescence linearly correlated to the ATP concentration, as
measured using a microplate luminometer (Varioskan
Flash, Thermo, USA).
TEM examination and propidium (PI) staining of bacterial
cells
After exposure of AgNPs and AgNCs, P. aeruginosa
cells were separated and then ﬁxed by glutaraldehyde at
4 °C overnight, followed by TEM examination (JEM2010,
Japan)46. Similarly, bacterial cells were stained with PI at
50 μg/mL for 20 min on ice and then visualized and
examined on a TCS SP5 microscope (Leica, Germany).
Determination of cellular Ag uptake
The Ag mass in treated bacteria was analyzed with the
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)
method, as described previously47–49. In brief, an equal
number of bacterial cells (determined by OD600 value)
were collected and digested with a strong oxidation-acid
solution (a 3:2 mixture of nitric acid and hydrogen per-
oxide) at room temperature. For the proportion of
membrane-bound silver, the membrane was ﬁrst extrac-
ted, followed by acid digestion. Eventually, the Ag content
was measured on an ICP-MS instrument (NexION
300X, USA).
Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation
Coarse-grained molecular dynamics (CGMD) simu-
lations were performed using the modiﬁed MARTINI
force ﬁeld, in which an average of four heavy atoms were
represented by a single bead to increase the timescale
and the space scale of the simulation system50. In our
simulations, each bacterial outer membrane comprises
two asymmetric leaﬂets. The outer leaﬂet consisted of
53
lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)
molecules
and
13
dipalmitoyl-phosphatidylethanolamine
(DPPE)
mole-
cules. The inner leaﬂet was composed of 175 DPPE
molecules. GNOMM software was used to construct the
initial structure of the bacterial outer membrane51. The
topology of the coarse-grained (CG) LPS was obtained
from the model, as proposed by Ma et al.52. The water
model based on the Morse potential was used to replace
the original MARTINI water to prevent unphysical
water freezing on the membrane surface53,54. The CG
structure of the AgNCs was derived from its atomic
structure while reserving the position of the binding
sites of the adamantine33. Here, each adamantine was
coarse-grained into a trihedron structure with a map-
ping ratio of ~3:1, and each core Ag atom was mapped
to one CG bead.
During the simulations of the interaction between
AgNMs and the bacterial membrane, the system was
equilibrated at zero tension using the NPT ensemble.
The temperature boundary conditions were set using
the Nose-Hoover algorithm, and the pressure boundary
conditions were set using the Parrinello-Rahman pres-
sure coupling method. For temperature coupling, the
water, DPPE, and LPS molecules were independently
coupled with relaxation times (τT) of 0.20, 1.00, and
1.00 ps, respectively. The reference temperature was set
at the body temperature of 310 K. The time step of all
simulations was 10 fs. The nonbonding pair list was
updated every 5 steps with a neighboring search cutoff
of 1.60 nm. All simulations were performed using the
GROMACS 4.5.5 package55.
Animal experimentation
Balb/c mice (7-week-old) were purchased from the
Beijing Vital River Laboratory Animal Technology Co.,
Ltd.
(Beijing,
China).
All
animal
experiments
were
approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the
Research Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chi-
nese Academy of Sciences. For the lung infection model,
prior to lung infection, MDR P. aeruginosa 5835 cells
were suspended in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) to
reach OD600 = 0.2. After an internasal drip for 30 min,
AgNPs and AgNCs administration was performed on
Chen et al. NPG Asia Materials (2020) 12:56
Page 5 of 15

anesthetized animals (by 5% sodium pentobarbital) by
instilling materials onto each nostril (in a total of 25 μL).
Forty-eight hours later, mice were anesthetized, and
bronchoalveolar tissue was ﬂushed with prewarmed PBS
to collect bronchoalveolar lavages. Afterwards, 100 μL of
bronchoalveolar lavages from each mouse was subjected
to culture on plates for 24 h. Blood was collected for
serum total bilirubin measurement using a commercial kit
(BioAssay Systems, California, USA). Serum IL-6 was
determined by a commercial kit following the instructions
from
the
manufacturer
(NEOBIOSCIENCE,
Beijing,
China), and other organs were also collected for histolo-
gical examination after H&E staining with respect to the
standard protocol.
Identiﬁcation of P. aeruginosa by endpoint polymer chain
reaction (PCR)
Brieﬂy, to extract bacterial DNA, a single colony from
the plates in different groups was individually suspended
in 20 μL of lysis buffer (0.25% sodium dodecyl sulfate and
0.05 M NaOH). After heating for 20 min at 95 °C in a dry
bath (Thermo Fisher, USA), 180 μL of DI water was
added. Then, isolated DNA was ampliﬁed in a 25 μL
reaction volume, as described previously56, with the fol-
lowing conditions: each reaction contained 2 μL of DNA
templates, 12.50 μL of StartMix, and 2 μL of mixed primer
(PA-SS-F56: GGGGGATCTTCGGACCTCA; PA-SS-R56:
TCCTTAGAGTGCCCACCCG) with additional DI water
to reach a total volume of 25 μL. The PCR procedures are
shown in Supplementary Table S1. After 25 cycles, ten
microliter PCR products were subjected to 1% agarose gel
electrophoresis (120 V/20 min), as described57.
Ag ion dissolution assessment
To determine Ag ion dissolution, AgNPs and AgNCs at
16 μg/mL in H2O were subjected to rotation at 180 rpm,
and 1 mL of H2O was aliquoted at different time points
and dialyzed with 8 kD dialysis bags in 100 mL of DI water
for 2 h. Thereafter, dialyzed Ag ions into water were
quantiﬁed through ICP-MS.
Statistical analysis
Experimental data are represented as the mean ± SD.
The signiﬁcant differences were analyzed with Student’s
t-test using SPSS software. Statistical signiﬁcance was
determined at P < 0.05.
Results and discussion
Deﬁnition of desirable parameters of AgNMs with superior
antimicrobial capability
First, to deﬁne the potency of various physicochemical
properties and experimental parameters affecting AgNM’s
antimicrobial efﬁcacy, quantitative calculation was carried
out through meta-analysis by collecting 266 sets of data
from 36 publications with rigorous inclusion/exclusion
criteria. Hereby, the random forest regression model was
used to quantify the contribution of seven indicators to
dictate the MIC values, including three physicochemical
properties (particle size, surface ligand and surface
charge) and four experimental setups (gram feature,
bacterial strain, exposure time and drug resistance). As
shown in Fig. 1a, the physicochemical properties of
AgNMs, i.e., the size and surface, bore much greater
inﬂuence on their antibacterial efﬁcacy than that of the
experimental parameters, such as bacterial features and
exposure time. Of note, the particle size was the most
impactful attribute, with an increase in the mean squared
error (MSE%) of ~20%, and further analysis manifested an
inverse correlation between the particle size and anti-
bacterial potency of AgNMs; that is, the smaller the size
was, the greater the antimicrobial effect, with the greatest
performance observed for sizes <15 nm (Fig. 1b). Since
there is no sufﬁcient literature to exhaustively analyze the
effects of core fraction and hydrophilicity and hydro-
phobicity, we further integrated experimental data to look
for optimal physicochemical property combinations. To
this end, we deliberately synthesized relatively small-sized
AgNCs and AgNPs with distinct hydrophilicity and
hydrophobicity characteristics. As shown in Fig. 1c and
Supplementary Fig. S2, AgNCs were synthesized from two
types of AgNMs with different ligands, S-Adm and MSA,
following our previous protocol with slight modiﬁca-
tions2. TEM images displayed an average size of AgNCs of
2.80 nm (Supplementary Fig. S2c). Two types of AgNPs
(#1 and #2) were fabricated with comparable diameters of
~3.80 nm and 3.20 nm, respectively (Supplementary Fig.
S2a, b). For hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity control, the
surface of AgNPs #1 harbored only MSA ligands, whereas
the AgNPs #2 surface contained both S-Adm and MSA.
As a result, AgNPs #1 could be dissolved only in water,
while AgNPs #2 could be dissolved in water and partially
dissolved in methylene chloride (CH2Cl2) (Fig. 1d). By
contrast, AgNCs displayed good solubility in both water
and CH2Cl2, suggesting that AgNCs are superior in ligand
exchange
reactions
for
hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity
relative to AgNPs. Owing to the bulkiness of S-Adm,
nanoclusters bear a low-surface thiolate coverage and,
thus, manifest extremely high-surface reactivities towards
exchange reactions with diverse ligands, including halides,
phenylacetylene and thiols33. Moreover, these ligands,
except halides, tend to replace [S-Adm] instead of halides
due to the particular surface binding structure of the
nanoclusters that are endowed by the bulky thiolates. In
other words, some Ag–S bonds among these S atoms in
the middle part of the cluster are longer than 2.70 Å,
rendering the thiolates easy targets for attack and eventual
replacement by these ligands33, as shown in Fig. 1c.
Therefore, AgNCs could be made amphiphilic through
Chen et al. NPG Asia Materials (2020) 12:56
Page 6 of 15

metathesis
with
water-soluble
ligands,
yielding
new
functionalities for various bioapplications. As the water-
soluble ligand MSA served as an exchange ligand,
amphiphilic AgNCs were successfully obtained. The FTIR
results showed that AgNCs had obvious absorption peaks
at ~1704 and 1535 cm−1 (denoted by green arrows)
(Supplementary Fig. S2d), corresponding to the C=O
vibrations of MSA and N–H bending of ammonium
acetate, respectively, as previously described58. In addi-
tion, AgNCs also contained S-Adm ligands, as indicated
by the absorption peaks at 2885 and 2841 cm−1 (indicated
by red arrows) (Supplementary Fig. S2d). Moreover,
AgNCs exhibited a broad absorption peak at ~460 nm,
which was mainly attributed to the core structure59,
whereas
AgNPs
#1
and
#2
displayed
a
signiﬁcant
absorption peak at ~410 nm (Fig. 1e). It should be noted
that AgNPs #1 and #2 and AgNCs were all negatively
charged in DI water (Supplementary Fig. S2e).
Antibacterial activity screening of AgNCs against MDR P.
aeruginosa
P. aeruginosa is a leading pathogen of hospital-acquired
pneumonia, often causing cystic ﬁbrosis (CF)60,61, and
MDRB strains cause even severe outcomes, such as
increased mortality, prolonged hospital stays and even the
necessity for surgery62. We therefore selected the P. aer-
uginosa MDRB strain (an isolate from a patent with ser-
ious infection, inhouse No. 5835) for detailed in vitro and
in vivo antibacterial assessment. First, we screened the
antibiotics towards the isolated P. aeruginosa strain in
comparison to the corresponding regular strain. As shown
in Supplementary Fig. S3, AgNCs suppressed both regular
and MDR P. aeruginosa strains, and the MIC values on
the susceptible and resistant P. aeruginosa strains indi-
cated no selectivity of AgNCs towards the regular or
MDRB
strain,
suggestive
of
wide-caliber
targeting.
Importantly, AgNCs revealed <2-fold greater efﬁcacy than
that of AgNPs (#1) in suppressing P. aeruginosa growth
(Supplementary Fig. S3). Moreover, as shown in Supple-
mentary Fig. S4, the screening data unveiled that AgNCs
started to restrain MDR P. aeruginosa growth starting at
very low concentrations, i.e., 1.60 μg/mL. A maximum
inhibition (~90%) was observed at 6.40 μg/mL, in contrast
to the 81% exhibited by AgNPs #1 and 62% by AgNPs #2
at the same concentration, as reﬂected by the measure-
ment of the optical density at 600 nm (OD600) (P < 0.001).
Subsequent
growth curves demonstrated
remarkable
suppression of bacterial cell growth by AgNCs over time
in contrast to mild inhibition by AgNPs #1 and #2 (Fig. 2a,
P < 0.001). Moreover, the plate culture assessment cor-
roborated the outstanding killing efﬁcacy of AgNCs of
~72.3% and 99.80% at 3.20 and 6.40 μg/mL, in compar-
ison to 59.50% and 95.50% for AgNPs #1 and 68.40% and
81.60% for AgNPs #2, respectively (Fig. 2b, c, P < 0.001).
Additionally, we examined the sensitization effect of AgNPs
and AgNCs in combination with antibiotics. As shown in
Supplementary Fig. S5, AgNPs (#1) and AgNCs, especially
the latter, greatly increased the sensitization of MDR P.
aeruginosa to imipenem (IMP) and tobramycin (TOB). In
this context, we revealed that AgNCs also acted to sensitize
MDR P. aeruginosa to antibiotics. Together, these results
unveiled that AgNCs bore pronounced bactericidal activity
against MDR P. aeruginosa, and this bactericidal potency
was superior to that of AgNPs.
Incredible capability of AgNCs to provoke free radicals
To interpret the enhanced cell death induced by AgNCs
in comparison to that induced by AgNPs, we attempted to
understand the plausible molecular basis underlying this
difference.
First,
we
determined
the
peroxidase-like
activity of these AgNMs. The AgNCs manifested even
greater peroxidase-like activity than AgNPs #1 and #2, as
reﬂected by their reinforced capability to catalyze the
conversion of the reporter molecule TMB (Fig. 3a, b). To
further
corroborate
the
remarkable
peroxidase-like
activity of AgNCs, the H2O2/Ag/DMPO spin trap sys-
tem was used to detect the hydroxyl radical signals. As
shown in Supplementary Fig. S6, the DMPO/•OH adduct
signal intensity was enhanced in response to these
nanomaterials (AgNPs #1 and AgNCs), and AgNCs pro-
moted more •OH radical production by catalyzing the
decomposition of H2O2, nearly 2-fold more than AgNPs
(#1)
catalysis.
Altogether,
these
results
essentially
demonstrated
that
AgNCs
showed
more
active
peroxidase-like activity than AgNPs. Although other
enzyme-mimicking activities have also been studied for
diverse nanomaterials63,64, our ﬁnding on the peroxidase-
like activity of AgNCs underpinned their antibacterial
effects.
Motivated by the greater peroxidase activity of AgNCs
in cell-free conditions, we endeavored to probe the free-
radical generation promoted by AgNCs in cells, which
may (at least in part) account for cellular injuries. As
shown in Fig. 3c, while AgNPs #1 and #2 only triggered
mild induction of ROS over time relative to that in
untreated cells, AgNCs dramatically promoted ROS pro-
duction at 6 h, with an almost threefold increase in ROS
compared to those in the untreated control (P < 0.001).
Similarly, the total amount of ATP declined by 16.90%,
39.50% and 72.80% in P. aeruginosa cells responding to
AgNPs #1 and #2 and AgNCs after 6 h of exposure at
6.4 μg/mL, respectively, compared to that in the untreated
control (Fig. 3d, P < 0.001). After normalization to the cell
numbers, as reﬂected by the OD600 values, the relative
cellular ATP production was also reduced by 51.10% in P.
aeruginosa cells in response to AgNCs relative to
untreated cells (Fig. 3e, P < 0.001), suggesting a great
attenuation of electron transfer and respiratory chain
Chen et al. NPG Asia Materials (2020) 12:56
Page 7 of 15

function in living bacterial cells. In contrast, no signiﬁcant
decline in relative ATP production was revealed in
AgNPs-treated cells (Fig. 3e). These ﬁndings deﬁned a
myriad of free radicals induced by AgNCs upon associa-
tion with bacterial cells and unveiled signiﬁcant impair-
ments of various cellular machineries and processes
through oxidative stress by AgNCs. Furthermore, the
above results revealed a mild difference between AgNPs
#1 and AgNPs #2. Therefore, only AgNPs #1 (termed
AgNPs in the following sections) was compared to AgNCs
for better mechanistic understanding in the following
investigations.
AgNCs tend to associate with bacterial cells and cause
wall/membrane damage
Afterwards, we inspected the molecular mechanisms
underlying the robust antibacterial activity of AgNCs.
Since AgNCs showed excellent amphiphilic modality due
to the copresence of both hydrophilic (–COO–) and
organophilic (S-Adm) groups on their surface, AgNCs
should associate with bacterial cells better than AgNPs.
To test this hypothesis, TEM analysis was conducted to
shed light on the interface between AgNCs and bacterial
cells. As shown in Fig. 4a, after exposing MDR P. aeru-
ginosa 5835 to AgNCs for 6 h, a large proportion (>30.0%)
of bacterial cells appeared in screw-like morphologies
with a large amount of surrounding debris (indicative of
previously dead cells) in comparison to the intact mor-
phology of untreated cells, and this proportion was much
lower in AgNPs-treated cells (~10%) (Fig. 4a and Sup-
plementary Fig. S7, P < 0.001), indicating severe damage of
P. aeruginosa bacterial cells upon introducing AgNCs.
Enlarged images of the interactions between AgNCs and
bacterial cells showed massive AgNCs localization in the
form of agglomeration together with cell debris (shown by
orange arrowheads) and inside cells (denoted by red
arrowheads) (Fig. 4a). In contrast, scarce AgNPs adsorp-
tion could be visualized on the cellular wall/membrane or
inside the cell, and most AgNPs self-aggregated outside
the bacterial cells, as indicated by blue arrowheads (Fig. 4a).
Notably, energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS)
conﬁrmed the nature of AgNMs in association with
bacterial cells (Supplementary Fig. S8). These observa-
tions, thus, conﬁrmed the active binding and inter-
nalization of AgNCs towards P. aeruginosa bacterial cells.
To explore the nano–bio interaction between AgNPs or
AgNCs and bacterial cells, we further investigated cellular
wall/membrane injuries, as reﬂected by propidium (PI)
staining and MDA leakage determination. As shown in
Fig. 4b, c, >43% of PI-positive cells were visualized upon
AgNCs treatment at 6.40 μg/mL for 6 h in comparison to
the 1.5% observed in the untreated control, and the pro-
portion of PI-positive cells was >2 times greater than that
in cells treated with AgNPs (P < 0.001), which was in
agreement with the above TEM results (Fig. 4a and
Supplementary Fig. S7). Analogously, membrane damage
led to elevated release of MDA into the culture medium,
especially in AgNCs-treated cells (Fig. 4d, P < 0.001).
Fig. 2 Antibacterial activity of AgNPs and AgNCs against multiple MDRB. a Cell growth curves were recorded over time starting from an OD600
value at 0.1, where P. aeruginosa MDR cells were exposed to AgNPs and AgNCs at 6.4 μg/mL. b The broth microdilution method42 was used to
evaluate the antibacterial effect. CFU counting of P. aeruginosa MDR strain 5835 treated with AgNPs #1, AgNPs #2 and AgNCs at 3.2 and 6.4 μg/mL
after culture on plates for 24 h, and quantiﬁed data are shown in c (n = 6). Pound sign (#) indicates P < 0.001.
Chen et al. NPG Asia Materials (2020) 12:56
Page 8 of 15

Therefore, these results showed active binding and uptake
of AgNCs by P. aeruginosa cells, coupled to severe
membrane damage, giving rise to a reinforced likelihood
of interaction between AgNCs and biomolecules within
bacterial cells.
To further prove that severe membrane damage resulted
from increased Ag binding, which was indicated by TEM
(Fig. 4a), we employed ICP-MS to determine the Ag uptake
of AgNPs and AgNCs of both total and membrane-binding
Ag. As shown in Fig. 4e, f, both the total Ag uptake and the
membrane-binding Ag increased by ~2-fold in AgNCs-
treated cells relative to that in AgNPs-treated cells (P <
0.001). Moreover, Fig. 4g shows a greater proportion of
membrane-bound Ag of the total Ag in AgNCs-treated cells
than that in AgNPs-treated cells. Previous studies demon-
strated that Ag ions released from particles also contributed
to the overall toxicity in diverse organisms47,65,66. Therefore,
we measured the percentage of ion dissolution from AgNCs
and AgNPs. Our data showed limited release of Ag ions
from AgNCs and AgNPs over time, and only ~1.50% of Ag
ions were identiﬁed coming out of AgNCs and AgNPs after
24 h (Supplementary Fig. S9a). Nevertheless, no toxicity was
Fig. 3 Outstanding peroxide-like activity of AgNCs associated with massive free-radical production. a and b Determination of peroxidase-like
properties of AgNCs and AgNPs. The color change and the maximum absorbance values at 370 and 652 nm for the TMB reactions are shown in a and
b, respectively. c Relative ROS production in P. aeruginosa cells upon exposure to AgNPs and AgNCs at 6.4 μg/mL over time (n = 3). The untreated
control was set as 1.0. d The amount of total ATP production by P. aeruginosa cells after exposure to AgNPs and AgNCs at 6.4 μg/mL for 6 h (n = 3).
e Relative ATP levels of P. aeruginosa cells upon AgNPs and AgNCs at 6.4 μg/mL for 6 h (n = 3) determined by normalizing to according OD600 values,
and the untreated control was set as 1.0. An asterisk (*) denotes P < 0.05, and a pound sign (#) indicates P < 0.001.
Chen et al. NPG Asia Materials (2020) 12:56
Page 9 of 15

found in P. aeruginosa cells at the concentration with a
maximum dissolution rate (Supplementary Fig. S9b), ruling
out the implication of Ag ions eliciting toxicity to P. aeru-
ginosa. Therefore, these ﬁndings further supported our
ﬁnding that enhanced uptake and binding, at least in part,
accounted for severe membrane damage of bacterial cells
upon AgNCs.
MD simulations reveal greater intrusion of AgNCs than
AgNPs into the bacterial bilayer membrane
To substantiate the above ﬁndings, we further used
coarse-grained MD (CGMD) simulations to speciﬁcally
study the difference in the process of AgNPs and AgNCs
penetrating the bacterial bilayer membrane. Considering
the asymmetry of the bacterial outer membrane (the outer
Fig. 4 Interaction of AgNCs and AgNPs with bacterial cells. a Representative TEM images showing the interaction of AgNCs and AgNPs with P.
aeruginosa cells after 6 h of exposure. Blue arrowheads indicate agglomerated particles outside cells, red arrowheads denote AgNCs inside cells, and
orange arrows point at cell debris. The enlarged images show the detailed interplay between AgNCs, AgNPs, and bacteria. b Evaluation of cell wall/
membrane damage using PI staining (in red) in MDR P. aeruginosa cells upon AgNPs and AgNCs at 6.4 μg/mL for 6 h. Images were visualized through
confocal microscopy (×600, original magniﬁcation). c Quantitative data of PI-positive cells (n = 3). d Relative extracellular MDA levels in culture media
from P. aeruginosa MDR cells treated with AgNPs and AgNCs at 6.4 μg/mL for 6 h (n = 3). The level in the untreated control was normalized to 1.0. A
pound sign (#) denotes P < 0.05 for AgNCs compared to AgNPs. e and f Cellular uptake of AgNPs and AgNCs, as reﬂected by Ag mass, in P. aeruginosa
cells after treatment for 6 h (n = 3). The e panel indicates the total silver mass, and the f panel denotes the silver in association with the plasma
membrane. g Calculation of the ratio between the mass on the membrane and the total amount for AgNCs and AgNPs, respectively (n = 3).
Chen et al. NPG Asia Materials (2020) 12:56
Page 10 of 15

layer mainly consists of LPS molecules, and the inner
layer is composed of only DPPE molecules), we compared
the interaction energies of the AgNMs with those of
DPPE and LPS molecules by adding an external force to
introduce AgNPs or AgNCs to enter the interior of the
membrane (Fig. 5a). The interaction energy diagram in
Fig. 5b shows that the van der Waals (VDW) interaction
energy between the AgNMs and the LPS dominated the
translocation of the AgNMs. Owing to the hydrophilicity
of AgNPs, a weaker VDW interaction with the hydro-
phobic tails of DPPE and a much stronger VDW inter-
action with the polar heads of LPS were revealed
compared to those of the amphiphilic AgNCs. A larger
negative value of the total interaction energy indicated a
stronger
binding
between
AgNMs
and
molecules.
Therefore, the AgNPs had to overcome more energy to
penetrate the membrane. It should be noted that although
the AgNPs could be more strongly repulsed by the
negatively charged heads of the LPS than the AgNCs, the
Coulomb interaction was relatively unimportant relative
to the VDW interaction. Therefore, the amphiphilic
property of AgNCs with two ligands could obviously
reduce the interaction energy with the LPS of the outer
membrane, therefore, intruding the outer membrane
more readily.
Antibacterial activity of AgNCs against MDR P. aeruginosa
in mice with pulmonary infection
Next, we assessed the performance of AgNCs to combat
MDR P. aeruginosa in a pulmonary infection mouse
model, as depicted in Fig. 6a, where AgNCs or AgNPs
were intranasally administered into mice 30 min after P.
aeruginosa 5835 infection. First, we examined the survival
of mice postinfection. In the untreated group, 4 out of 8
mice died within 48 h, in contrast to 3 out of 8 in the
AgNPs-treated group and 1 out of 7 in the AgNCs-treated
group (Fig. 6b), suggesting reinforced tolerance of mice
against P. aeruginosa intrusion upon treatment, particu-
larly that with AgNCs. The propagation of P. aeruginosa in
the lungs was further determined by cultivating bronch-
oalveolar lavages from mice 2 days post administration. As
shown in Fig. 6c, CFU counting showed a substantial
reduction in P. aeruginosa cells in the lungs of the AgNCs-
treated mice, with an average of 1 CFU/plate, in contrast
to 53 CFU/plate in the AgNPs-treated group and 175
CFU/plate in the untreated group (P < 0.001), indicating
the outstanding killing efﬁcacy of AgNCs against P. aer-
uginosa in the lung. Through polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) analysis of the evolutionally conserved sequence in
P. aeruginosa56, our data corroborated the identity of
P. aeruginosa from these clones (Supplementary Fig. S10).
Fig. 5 CGMD simulations of the interactions between AgNMs and the bacterial membrane. a Initial interaction structure of the AgNPs, AgNCs,
and the bacterial membrane. The head groups of the LPS and DPPE are shown as green sticks; the tails of the LPS and DPPE are shown as blue sticks.
The carboxyl groups and adamantanes are shown as red and cyan sticks. The core silver and sulfur atoms are shown as yellow and orange beads.
b Interaction energy between AgNPs/AgNCs and the LPS/DPPE molecules. The negative value represents the attraction interaction, and the positive
value indicates the repulsion interaction. Coul and VDW represent Coulomb interactions and van der Waals interactions, respectively.
Chen et al. NPG Asia Materials (2020) 12:56
Page 11 of 15

Fig. 6 In vivo assessment of the antibacterial activity of AgNPs and AgNCs against MDR P. aeruginosa. a A schematic delineating the
experimental procedure of AgNPsAgNPs and AgNCs administration in mice with lung infection of P. aeruginosa MDR strain 5835. b The survival
rate of mice with or without treatment for 48 h. c CFU assessment of bronchoalveolar lavages from mice after 48 h of treatment with AgNPs and
AgNCs at 0.8 mg/kg body weight. The average CFU data are shown in the right panel (n = 8). d H&E staining of lung sections from mice after
treatment with AgNPs and AgNCs for 7 days. Black arrowheads indicate collapsed alveoli, green arrowheads denote inﬂammatory cells, blue
arrowheads show compressed interstitial space, and yellow arrowheads represent hemolysis areas. The inserts show the enlarged view of the
lung tissue (×600, original magniﬁcation). e Total bilirubin in sera from the above treated mice (n = 8). Pound sign (#) indicates P < 0.001,
compared to untreated mice.
Chen et al. NPG Asia Materials (2020) 12:56
Page 12 of 15

To further recognize the protective role of AgNCs in the
lungs from P. aeruginosa infection, we examined lung
histology. As shown in Fig. 6d, relative to that of the blank
control mice, histological alterations featured very severe
pneumonia, as characterized by extensive inﬁltration of
inﬂammatory cells (indicated by green arrowheads), col-
lapsed alveoli (indicated by black arrowheads) and com-
pressed interstitial space (denoted by blue arrowheads). In
stark contrast, AgNCs administration signiﬁcantly ame-
liorated the pneumonic phenotypes, as these morpholo-
gical injuries nearly disappeared in AgNCs-treated mice
after treatment for 48 h and 7 days (Supplementary Fig.
S11 and the bottom panel in Fig. 6d), conﬁrming the
remarkable killing efﬁcacy of AgNCs against MDR P.
aeruginosa 5835 in the lung. Moreover, marked hemolysis
was observed in the interstitial space of untreated mice
(denoted by yellow arrowheads). However, nearly no
hemolysis was found in the lungs of AgNCs-treated mice
(Fig. 6d). In support of these observations, the total serum
bilirubin concentration was elevated ~4 times in untreated
mice compared to that in the mock control (Fig. 6e,
P < 0.001). In comparison, the bilirubin level dropped to
baseline in AgNCs-treated mice (Fig. 6e, P < 0.001), indi-
cative of the disappearance of hemolysis. Moreover,
AgNCs tremendously abolished systemic inﬂammation, as
evidenced by a > 50.0% reduction in the serum IL-6 con-
tent in mice after AgNCs treatment for 48 h (P < 0.05), in
contrast to the small change in mice upon AgNPs treat-
ment compared to the untreated control (Supplementary
Fig. S12). Furthermore, AgNPs could also mitigate these
pneumonic phenotypes but to a much lesser extent than
AgNCs (Fig. 6d, e), consistent with the in vitro observa-
tions (Fig. 2). Consistently, the complete blood count
(CBC) data suggested that systemic inﬂammation was
relieved in infected mice upon treatment, especially upon
AgNCs, as evidenced by the reduction in white blood cell
counts (data not shown). Additionally, to probe the
antibacterial activity of AgNCs against other MDRB, we
also worked on clinical isolates that were deliberately
puriﬁed from patients with serious infections. Addition-
ally, four paired regular and corresponding MDRB
strains, including Acinetobacter baumannii (A. bau-
mannii) and Escherichia coli (E. coli), were subjected to
treatment with AgNPs and AgNCs. As shown in Sup-
plementary Fig. S13, AgNCs displayed a remarkable
capability to repress the growth of all these strains at 3.20
and 6.40 μg/mL, showing much greater potency than that
of AgNPs (P < 0.05). Altogether, these data substantiated
the outstanding antibacterial activity of AgNCs against
various MDRB.
Considering
the
biosafety
and
biocompatibility
of
AgNPs and AgNCs, we thoroughly assessed the toxicity of
AgNPs and AgNCs in vivo and in vitro. As shown in
Supplementary Fig. S14, the animal experimental results
indicated that neither AgNPs nor AgNCs caused sig-
niﬁcant toxicity to diverse tissues, including heart, liver,
spleen, lung, kidney and brain tissues, as characterized by
histological examination based on H&E staining. More-
over, CBC was determined after treatment with AgNMs.
As shown in Supplementary Table S2, no signiﬁcant
change in CBC indexes was found in mice upon treatment
with AgNMs, conﬁrming the excellent biocompatibility of
these AgNMs. In addition, we also determined the cyto-
toxicity of AgNPs and AgNCs at various concentrations in
different cell lines. As shown in Supplementary Fig. S15,
the results indicated that AgNCs and AgNPs did not
exhibit signiﬁcant toxicity even at higher concentrations
towards A549 (pulmonary epithelial cells), HL-7702
(normal human hepatocytes), and C2C12 (mouse myo-
blast cells) cells. With the combined results from both
in vitro and in vivo experiments, we deduced that the
AgNPs and AgNCs were biocompatible at the tested
concentrations.
Conclusions
To summarize, our experimental data together with a
meta-analysis revealed that small AgNCs were superior to
conventional AgNPs against MDR P. aeruginosa. Speci-
ﬁcally, our ﬁndings unearthed the great importance of the
size, core structure and surface ligands in dictating the
antibacterial activity of AgNCs. Our experimental data
together with MD simulation ﬁndings unveiled that
AgNCs with amphiphilic ligands showed strong nano–bio
interactions towards bacterial cells and thereby under-
went active endocytosis by the targeted cells. Moreover,
AgNCs harbored robust peroxidase-like activity and the
strong capability to promote ROS generation. To this end,
AgNCs manifested great bacteria-killing efﬁcacy in vitro
against MDR P. aeruginosa and a therapeutic outcome in
treating
P.
aeruginosa-induced
pneumonia
in
mice.
AgNCs also bore excellent cyto-/biocompatibility. This
study opens a new avenue for AgNCs as promising
therapeutics to combat MDRB.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported under grants from the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (grant numbers: 21637004, 21920102007, 21922611 and
21707161), the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (grant number: 8191002)
and the international collaboration key grant from the Chinese Academy of
Sciences (grant number: 121311KYSB20190010).
Author details
1State Key Laboratory of Environmental Chemistry and Ecotoxicology, Research
Center for Eco-Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100085
Beijing, China. 2University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100049 Beijing,
China. 3State Key Laboratory for Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces,
Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Energy Materials, and
National & Local Joint Engineering Research Center for Preparation
Technology of Nanomaterials, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering,
Xiamen University, 361005 Xiamen, China. 4Department of Pulmonary and
Critical Care Medicine, Center of Respiratory Medicine, China-Japan Friendship
Hospital, and National Clinical Research Center for Respiratory Diseases, 100029
Chen et al. NPG Asia Materials (2020) 12:56
Page 13 of 15

Beijing, China. 5State Key Laboratory of Nonlinear Mechanics, Institute of
Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100190 Beijing, China. 6Department
of Engineering Mechanics, Zhejiang University, 310027 Hangzhou, China
Author contributions
N.F.Z., G.Q.Z., and S.J.L. conceived and designed the study. Y.J.C., L.T.R., and L.X.
S. carried out the experiments and analyzed the data. X.B. and G.Q.H.
performed the MD simulations. L.T.R., G.Q.Z., L.X.S., and B.C. contributed
reagents and materials. L.X.S. and B.C. provided the bacterial strains. All authors
revised the manuscript and approved the submission.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s note
Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41427-020-00239-y.
Received: 20 March 2020 Revised: 3 June 2020 Accepted: 7 June 2020.
Published online: 4 September 2020
References
1.
Willyard, C. The drug-resistant bacteria that pose the greatest health threats.
Nature 543, 15 (2017).
2.
Magiorakos, A.-P. et al. Multidrug-resistant, extensively drug-resistant and
pandrug-resistant bacteria: an international expert proposal for interim
standard deﬁnitions for acquired resistance. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. 18, 268–281
(2012).
3.
Potron, A., Poirel, L. & Nordmann, P. Emerging broad-spectrum resistance in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter baumannii: mechanisms and
epidemiology. Int. J. Antimicrob. Ag. 45, 568–585 (2015).
4.
Le Ouay, B. & Stellacci, F. Antibacterial activity of silver nanoparticles: a surface
science insight. Nano Today 10, 339–354 (2015).
5.
Cui, Y. et al. The molecular mechanism of action of bactericidal gold nano-
particles on Escherichia coli. Biomaterials 33, 2327–2333 (2012).
6.
Lin, A. et al. Bacteria-responsive biomimetic selenium nanosystem for
multidrug-resistant bacterial infection detection and inhibition. ACS Nano 13,
13965–13984 (2019).
7.
Huang, N., Chen, X., Zhu, X., Xu, M. & Liu, J. Ruthenium complexes/polypeptide
self-assembled nanoparticles for identiﬁcation of bacterial infection and tar-
geted antibacterial research. Biomaterials 141, 296–313 (2017).
8.
Jesline, A., John, N. P., Narayanan, P., Vani, C. & Murugan, S. Antimicrobial
activity of zinc and titanium dioxide nanoparticles against bioﬁlm-producing
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Appl. Nanosci. 5, 157–162 (2015).
9.
Masadeh, M. M. et al. Cerium oxide and iron oxide nanoparticles abolish the
antibacterial activity of ciproﬂoxacin against gram positive and gram negative
bioﬁlm bacteria. Cytotechnology 67, 427–435 (2015).
10.
Zheng, H. et al. Engineered graphene oxide nanocomposite capable of pre-
venting the evolution of antimicrobial resistance. ACS Nano 13, 11488–11499
(2019).
11.
Chen, J. et al. Graphene oxide exhibits broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity
against bacterial phytopathogens and fungal conidia by intertwining and
membrane perturbation. Nanoscale 6, 1879–1889 (2014).
12.
Vranic, S. et al. Live imaging of label-free graphene oxide reveals critical factors
causing oxidative-stress-mediated cellular responses. ACS Nano 12, 1373–1389
(2017).
13.
Das, B. et al. Green synthesized silver nanoparticles destroy multidrug resistant
bacteria via reactive oxygen species mediated membrane damage. Arab. J.
Chem. 10, 862–876 (2017).
14.
Cai, S. et al. Porous Pt/Ag nanoparticles with excellent multifunctional enzyme
mimic activities and antibacterial effects. Nano Res. 10, 2056–2069 (2017).
15.
Wang, L.-S., Gupta, A. & Rotello, V. M. Nanomaterials for the treatment of
bacterial bioﬁlms. ACS Infect. Dis. 2, 3–4 (2016).
16.
Li, X. et al. Functional gold nanoparticles as potent antimicrobial agents
against multi-drug-resistant bacteria. ACS Nano 8, 10682–10686 (2014).
17.
Courtney, C. M. et al. Photoexcited quantum dots for killing multidrug-resistant
bacteria. Nat. Mater. 15, 529–534 (2016).
18.
Singh, R., Smitha, M. S. & Singh, S. P. The role of nanotechnology in combating
multi-drug resistant bacteria. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 14, 4745–4756 (2014).
19.
O’Connell, K. M. G. et al. Combating multidrug-resistant bacteria: current
strategies for the discovery of novel antibacterials. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 52,
10706–10733 (2013).
20.
Rai, M. K., Deshmukh, S. D., Ingle, A. P. & Gade, A. K. Silver nanoparticles: the
powerful nanoweapon against multidrug-resistant bacteria. J. Appl. Microbiol.
112, 841–852 (2012).
21.
Franci, G. et al. Silver nanoparticles as potential antibacterial agents. Molecules
20, 8856–8874 (2015).
22.
Agnihotri, S., Mukherji, S. & Mukherji, S. Size-controlled silver nanoparticles
synthesized over the range 5-100 nm using the same protocol and their
antibacterial efﬁcacy. RSC Adv. 4, 3974–3983 (2014).
23.
Sotiriou, G. A. & Pratsinis, S. E. Antibacterial activity of nanosilver ions and
particles. Environ. Sci. Technol. 44, 5649–5654 (2010).
24.
Chernousova, S. & Epple, M. Silver as antibacterial agent: ion, nanoparticle, and
metal. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 52, 1636–1653 (2013).
25.
Panáček, A. et al. Silver colloid nanoparticles: synthesis, characterization, and
their antibacterial activity. J. Phys. Chem. B 110, 16248–16253 (2006).
26.
Chaloupka, K., Malam, Y. & Seifalian, A. M. Nanosilver as a new generation of
nanoproduct in biomedical applications. Trends Biotechnol. 28, 580–588 (2010).
27.
Valden, M., Lai, X. & Goodman, D. W. Onset of catalytic activity of gold clusters
on titania with the appearance of nonmetallic properties. Science 281,
1647–1650 (1998).
28.
Suber, L. et al. Nanocluster superstructures or nanoparticles? The self-
consuming scaffold decides. Nanoscale 10, 7472–7483 (2018).
29.
Yau, S. H., Varnavski, O. & Goodson, T. An ultrafast look at Au nanoclusters. Acc.
Chem. Res 46, 1506–1516 (2013).
30.
Turner, M. et al. Selective oxidation with dioxygen by gold nanoparticle cat-
alysts derived from 55-atom clusters. Nature 454, 981–983 (2008).
31.
Tian, X., Kong, X.-J., Zhu, Z.-M., Chen, T.-T. & Chu, X. A new label-free and turn-
on strategy for endonuclease detection using a DNA–silver nanocluster probe.
Talanta 131, 116–120 (2015).
32.
Yao, C. H. et al. Adding two active silver atoms on Au-25 nanoparticle. Nano
Lett. 15, 1281–1287 (2015).
33.
Ren, L. T. et al. Bulky surface ligands promote surface reactivities of [Ag141X12
(S-Adm)(40)](3+) (X=Cl, Br, I) nanoclusters: models for multiple-twinned
nanoparticles. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 139, 13288–13291 (2017).
34.
Sun, Z. et al. Silver nanoclusters with speciﬁc ion recognition modulated by
ligand passivation toward ﬂuorimetric and colorimetric copper analysis and
biological imaging. Sci. Rep. 6, 20553 (2016).
35.
Cathcart, N. & Kitaev, V. Silver nanoclusters: single-stage scaleable synthesis of
monodisperse species and their chirooptical properties. J. Phys. Chem. C. 114,
16010–16017 (2010).
36.
Diez, I. & Ras, R. H. A. Fluorescent silver nanoclusters. Nanoscale 3, 1963–1970
(2011).
37.
Dhanya, S., Saumya, V. & Rao, T. P. Synthesis of silver nanoclusters, character-
ization and application to trace level sensing of nitrate in aqueous media.
Electrochim. Acta 102, 299–305 (2013).
38.
Feng, L. P. et al. Silver nanoclusters with enhanced ﬂuorescence and speciﬁc
ion recognition capability triggered by alcohol solvents: a highly selective
ﬂuorimetric strategy for detecting iodide ions in urine. Chem. Commun. 53,
9466–9469 (2017).
39.
Oh, E. et al. Meta-analysis of cellular toxicity for cadmium-containing quantum
dots. Nat. Nanotechnol. 11, 479 (2016).
40.
Breiman, L. Random forests. Mach. Learn. 45, 5–32 (2001).
41.
Yao, B. et al. Clinical and molecular characteristics of multi-clone carbapenem-
resistant hypervirulent (hypermucoviscous) Klebsiella pneumoniae isolates in a
tertiary hospital in Beijing, China. Int. J. Infect. Dis. 37, 107–112 (2015).
42.
Wiegand, I., Hilpert, K. & Hancock, R. E. W. Agar and broth dilution methods to
determine the minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) of antimicrobial sub-
stances. Nat. Protoc. 3, 163 (2008).
43.
Zhang, Y. W. et al. Emergence of a hypervirulent carbapenem-resistant Kleb-
siella pneumoniae isolate from clinical infections in China. J. Infect. 71, 553–560
(2015).
44.
Zheng, K. Y., Setyawati, M. I., Lim, T. P., Leong, D. T. & Xie, J. P. Antimicrobial
cluster bombs: silver nanoclusters packed with daptomycin. ACS Nano 10,
7934–7942 (2016).
Chen et al. NPG Asia Materials (2020) 12:56
Page 14 of 15

45.
Gutteridge, J. M. C. & Halliwell, B. The measurement and mechanism of lipid-
peroxidation in biological-systems. Trends Biochem. Sci. 15, 129–135 (1990).
46.
Zhang, J., Wang, S. H., Gao, M., Li, R. B. & Liu, S. J. Multihierarchically proﬁling the
biological effects of various metal-based nanoparticles in macrophages under
low exposure doses. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 6, 10374–10384 (2018).
47.
Wang, Z., Xia, T. & Liu, S. J. Mechanisms of nanosilver-induced toxicological
effects: more attention should be paid to its sublethal effects. Nanoscale 7,
7470–7481 (2015).
48.
Qian, Y. et al. Silver nanoparticle-induced hemoglobin decrease involves
alteration of histone 3 methylation status. Biomaterials 70, 12–22 (2015).
49.
Chen, Y. et al. Nanosilver incurs an adaptive shunt of energy metabolism mode
to glycolysis in tumor and nontumor cells. ACS Nano 8, 5813–5825 (2014).
50.
Marrink, S. J., Risselada, H. J., Yeﬁmov, S., Tieleman, D. P. & de Vries, A. H. The
MARTINI force ﬁeld: coarse grained model for biomolecular simulations. J.
Phys. Chem. B 111, 7812–7824 (2007).
51.
Baltoumas, F. A., Hamodrakas, S. J. & Iconomidou, V. A. The gram-negative
outer membrane modeler: automated building of lipopolysaccharide-rich
bacterial outer membranes in four force ﬁelds. J. Comput. Chem. 40,
1727–1734 (2019).
52.
Ma, H., Irudayanathan, F. J., Jiang, W. & Nangia, S. Simulating Gram-negative
bacterial outer membrane: a coarse grain model. J. Phys. Chem. B 119,
14668–14682 (2015).
53.
Chiu, S. W., Scott, H. L. & Jakobsson, E. A coarse-grained model based on morse
potential for water and n-alkanes. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 6, 851–863 (2010).
54.
Bai, X., Xu, L., Tang, J. Y., Zuo, Y. Y. & Hu, G. Adsorption of phospholipids at the
air-water surface. Biophys. J. 117, 1224–1233 (2019).
55.
Hess, B., Kutzner, C., van der Spoel, D. & Lindahl, E. GROMACS 4: algorithms for
highly efﬁcient, load-balanced, and scalable molecular simulation. J. Chem.
Theory Comput. 4, 435–447 (2008).
56.
Spilker, T., Coenye, T., Vandamme, P. & LiPuma, J. J. PCR-based assay for
differentiation
of
Pseudomonas
aeruginosa
from
other
Pseudomonas
species recovered from cystic ﬁbrosis patients. J. Clin. Microbiol. 42, 2074–2079
(2004).
57.
Wang, Y. Y., Wang, F. B., Wang, H. L. & Song, M. Y. Graphene oxide enhances
the speciﬁcity of the polymerase chain reaction by modifying primer-template
matching. Sci. Rep. 7, ARTN 16510 (2017).
58.
Kumar Trivedi, M. Fourier transform infrared and ultraviolet-visible spectro-
scopic characterization of ammonium acetate and ammonium chloride: an
impact of bioﬁeld treatment. Mod. Chem. Appl. 03, https://doi.org/10.4172/
2329-6798.1000163 (2015).
59.
Takele, H., Greve, H., Pochstein, C., Zaporojtchenko, V. & Faupel, F. Plasmonic
properties of Ag nanoclusters in various polymer matrices. Nanotechnology 17,
3499–3505 (2006).
60.
Gellatly, S. L. & Hancock, R. E. W. Pseudomonas aeruginosa: new insights into
pathogenesis and host defenses. Pathog. Dis. 67, 159–173 (2013).
61.
Fujitani, S., Sun, H. Y., Yu, V. L. & Weingarten, J. A. Pneumonia due to Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa part I: epidemiology, clinical diagnosis, and source. Chest
139, 909–919 (2011).
62.
Aloush, V., Navon-Venezia, S., Seigman-Igra, Y., Cabili, S. & Carmeli, Y. Multidrug-
resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa: risk factors and clinical impact. Antimicrob.
Agents Chemother. 50, 43–48 (2006).
63.
Gao, M. et al. Two‐dimensional Tin selenide (SnSe) nanosheets capable of
mimicking key dehydrogenases in cellular metabolism. Angew. Chem. 132,
3647–3652 (2020).
64.
Chong, Y. et al. Palladium concave nanocrystals with high-index facets
accelerate ascorbate oxidation in cancer treatment. Nat. Commun. 9, 1–10
(2018).
65.
Xiu, Z. M., Zhang, Q. B., Puppala, H. L., Colvin, V. L. & Alvarez, P. J. J. Negligible
particle-speciﬁc antibacterial activity of silver nanoparticles. Nano Lett. 12,
4271–4275 (2012).
66.
Kedziora, A. et al. Similarities and differences between silver ions and silver in
nanoforms as antibacterial agents. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 19, ARTN 444 (2018).
Chen et al. NPG Asia Materials (2020) 12:56
Page 15 of 15