Degradation-tunable coating with sustained silver release for spinal 
implants to prevent postoperative infections
Kecheng Quan a,b,c,e,1, Ting Zhang c,1, Xingyu Zhou d,1
, Shanshan Liu a,b,e, Zhinan Mao c,  
Jiang Sun a, Shilin Xue a,d, Xingchen Yao a,d, Yinglun Tian a,b,e, Cheng Zhang a,d, Jian He a,d,  
Dingbang Xie a,d, Weishi Li a,b,e,*, Shenglin Wang a,b,e,**, Yufeng Zheng c,e,***,  
Nanfang Xu a,b,e,****
a Department of Orthopaedics, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, 100191, PR China
b Engineering Research Center of Bone and Joint Precision Medicine, Ministry of Education, Beijing, 100191, PR China
c School of Materials Science and Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, PR China
d Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, 100191, PR China
e Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Bioadaptable Orthopedic Implants, Beijing 100871, PR China
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Implant-associated infections
Antibacterial coating
Controlled drug release
Atlantoaxial dislocation
Silver nanoparticles
A B S T R A C T
Irreducible atlantoaxial dislocation is a challenging condition for spine surgeons and carries a particularly high 
risk of postoperative infection due to its trans-oral approach for peri-odontoid soft tissue release. Conventional 
antibacterial implant coatings are limited by rapid burst release, leading to short-term efficacy and potential 
cytotoxicity. To address this, we developed a composite coating of silver nanoparticle-decorated ZIF-8 (AgZ) 
within a tunable methacrylate gelatin (GelMA) and silk fibroin (SF) matrix (AgZ/GelSF) for 3D-printed Ti-6Al-4V 
fusion cages. The AgZ nanocomposite enhanced silver dispersibility and potency, reducing the minimum 
bactericidal concentration against MRSA and E. coli by over 4-fold and 13-fold, respectively. By adjusting the 
GelMA-to-SF mass ratio, we finely tuned the degradation rate and silver release profile, ensuring a sustained 
release over 28 days, which aligns with the typical wound healing timeline. RNA sequencing indicated the 
coating's mechanism involves bacterial membrane disruption and metabolic interference, preventing biofilm 
formation. Optimization of the coating components demonstrated excellent biocompatibility and osteogenic 
performance both in vitro and in a rabbit femoral defect model. In a bacteria-contaminated porcine model for 
atlantoaxial fixation and intra-articular fusion, the AgZ/GelSF-coated implant effectively eliminated bacterial 
infection and supported successful bone fusion, all while showing no systemic toxicity. Compared with previous 
studies, this work demonstrates significant advantages in antibacterial efficiency, drug release duration and 
evaluation models. These findings suggest that the AgZ/GelSF composite coating is a promising strategy for 
preventing implant-associated infections through a degradation-controlled drug release platform.
1. Introduction
Spinal implant surgery plays a critical role in modern orthopedic 
treatment for conditions such as spinal degeneration, trauma, and de­
formities [1–3]. However, implant-associated infections (IAIs) remain a 
major postoperative complication, leading to severe pain, repeated 
surgeries, prolonged antibiotic treatments, implant failure, non-union, 
and neurological damage, which place a significant burden on both 
patients and healthcare systems [4–7]. Despite the implementation of 
stringent aseptic protocols and perioperative prophylactic antibiotics, 
Peer review under the responsibility of editorial board of Bioactive Materials.
* Corresponding author. Department of Orthopaedics, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, 100191, PR China.
** Corresponding author. Department of Orthopaedics, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, 100191, PR China.
*** Corresponding author. School of Materials Science and Engineering, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, PR China.
**** Corresponding author. Department of Orthopaedics, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, 100191, PR China.
E-mail addresses: puh3liweishi@163.com (W. Li), pkuwsl@126.com (S. Wang), yfzheng@pku.edu.cn (Y. Zheng), xunanfang@foxmail.com (N. Xu). 
1 These authors contributed equally to the work.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Bioactive Materials
journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/bioactive-materials
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2026.02.035
Received 5 December 2025; Received in revised form 15 February 2026; Accepted 17 February 2026  
Bioactive Materials 61 (2026) 712–729 
Available online 27 February 2026 
2452-199X/© 2026 The Authors. Publishing services by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC 
BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ). 

conventional implants, owing to their inherently bioinert surfaces, are 
ineffective at preventing bacterial colonization and biofilm formation at 
the surgical site [8]. Bacterial biofilms can increase resistance to anti­
biotics by up to a thousand-fold, drastically limiting the efficacy of 
systemic treatments [9,10]. Among spinal procedures, transoral atlan­
toaxial fixation combined with intra-articular fusion constitutes an 
important strategy for treating the challenging condition of irreducible 
atlantoaxial dislocation (AAD). However, operations performed via the 
transoral approach are associated with a particularly high risk of post­
operative infection [11,12]. Due to its unique approach through the oral 
cavity, the implant is inevitably exposed to a polymicrobial environ­
ment, including both aerobic and anaerobic bacteria. In addition, the 
region's limited soft tissue coverage, poor vascular supply, and contin­
uous retropharyngeal motion further exacerbate the risk of deep in­
fections [13]. Once infection occurs, the consequences can be 
catastrophic, ranging from failure of internal fixation and fusion to 
spinal cord compression, and even potentially fatal intracranial infec­
tion [14,15]. Given the time required for wound healing, there is a 
pressing clinical need for novel implants capable of providing sustained, 
long-term protection against infection, especially in such high-risk 
anatomical regions.
One promising strategy is the surface modification of implants via 
antibacterial coatings [16,17]. Traditional coatings are typically pro­
duced through chemical or physical methods to incorporate bactericidal 
agents, aiming to kill bacteria upon contact [18]. However, these coat­
ings often release drugs in an uncontrolled, rapid burst [19,20]. This 
burst release not only leads to local drug concentrations exceeding safe 
thresholds, causing cytotoxicity and impeding osseointegration, but also 
results in early depletion of the antimicrobial agents, long before wound 
healing is complete [21]. Consequently, these coatings fail to offer 
long-term protection and leave the implant vulnerable to recurrent in­
fections. The choice of antimicrobial agent is equally crucial. Ideally, the 
agent should offer broad-spectrum antibacterial efficacy in complex 
microbial environments while minimizing the risk of inducing resis­
tance. Common agents include antibiotics, quaternary ammonium 
compounds, antimicrobial peptides, and metal-based nanoparticles 
[20]. Compared to conventional organic agents and antimicrobial pep­
tides, which are frequently limited by enzymatic instability, complex 
synthesis, and short-term bioactivity, silver nanoparticles offer distinct 
advantages in terms of thermal stability, ease of fabrication, and potent 
broad-spectrum antibacterial performance [22]. These properties render 
AgNPs particularly suitable for incorporation into multifunctional 
composite coatings designed for long-term orthopedic applications. 
Nonetheless, their clinical application is hindered by concerns over 
cytotoxicity [23]. Thus, developing coatings that allow controlled 
degradation and release, while simultaneously mitigating the biological 
toxicity of AgNPs, remains a major challenge in preventing IAIs, espe­
cially in open spinal surgeries.
To address these challenges, our team has made substantial progress 
through preliminary research. First, we found that the bioavailability of 
AgNPs can be improved by enhancing their aqueous dispersibility, 
which enables a reduction in the required dosage and thereby lessens 
cytotoxic effects without compromising antibacterial efficacy [24,25]. 
Specifically, we synthesized UiO-66/Ag nanocomposites by in situ 
reduction of silver nanoparticles on the surface of the metal–organic 
framework (MOF) material UiO-66 [26]. At equal silver content, the 
antibacterial activity of UiO-66/Ag was significantly greater than that of 
bare AgNPs against either Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
(MRSA) or Escherichia coli (E. coli). This remarkable enhancement allows 
for a significant reduction in silver dosage, lowering toxicity risks. 
However, UiO-66 exhibits relatively fast degradation under physiolog­
ical conditions (pH 7.4), while remaining more stable under acidic 
conditions (pH 5.0) [27]. This property limits its effectiveness for 
long-term, in vivo drug release. To address this limitation, we developed 
composite coatings by blending natural silk fibroin (SF), which becomes 
less 
hydrophilic 
and 
degrades 
slowly 
after 
drying, 
with 
methacrylate-modified silk fibroin, which retains greater hydrophilicity 
and degrades more rapidly [28]. By adjusting the mass ratio of these two 
components, the coating's degradation rate can be finely tuned, allowing 
for precise control over drug release in accordance with clinical re­
quirements. This approach offers a means to moderate local concen­
trations of antimicrobial agents, thereby reducing cytotoxicity.
Building on this foundation, the current study focuses on synthesiz­
ing silver nanoparticles on the surface of ZIF-8, a widely used MOF 
material in biomedicine [29], to create Ag@ZIF-8 (AgZ) nanocomposites 
(Scheme 1a). ZIF-8 is well known for its simple synthesis, high 
biocompatibility, 
controllable 
degradation, 
and 
pH-responsive 
behavior, being stable under physiological and alkaline conditions 
while degrading rapidly in acidic environments [30]. These features 
ensure structural stability under normal physiological conditions and 
increase activity in infected, acidic microenvironments [31]. Next, we 
formulated a composite coating by incorporating AgZ into a matrix 
composed of methacrylate gelatin (GelMA) and SF. This composite was 
used to coat 3D-printed Ti-6Al-4V intra-articular fusion cages. The 
degradation rate of the coating, and hence the drug release profile, are 
supposed to be precisely regulated by varying the GelMA-to-SF ratio. 
GelMA promotes cell adhesion and exhibits good biocompatibility but 
suffers from rapid degradation and poor mechanical strength [32,33]. In 
contrast, SF is known for its excellent mechanical properties and 
biocompatibility, but its low bioactivity and slow degradation limit its 
effectiveness in dynamic biological environments [34,35]. By 
combining these two materials, we created a synergistic system that 
overcomes the limitations of each component and provides a promising 
platform for controlled, clinically tailored drug release.
Experimental results demonstrated that in situ reduction of AgNPs on 
ZIF-8 significantly improved nanoparticle dispersibility in aqueous 
media, resulting in enhanced antibacterial efficacy. The degradation 
rate of the GelMA/SF (GelSF) composite coating was successfully fine- 
tuned by adjusting the component ratio, allowing the release profile to 
align with the wound healing timeline. Based on in vitro cytotoxicity 
assays, the optimal AgZ loading concentration and coating density for 
the 3D-printed Ti-6Al-4V cages were determined. Both in vitro osteo­
genic assays and in vivo studies using a rabbit femoral defect model 
confirmed that the optimized AgZ/GelSF coating did not impair osteo­
genesis of the Ti-6Al-4V implant. During immersion in physiological 
saline, silver nanoparticles were gradually released as the GelSF coating 
degraded. These released nanoparticles effectively killed attached bac­
terial cells, both MRSA and E. coli. Electron microscopy and RNA 
sequencing analysis revealed that the antibacterial mechanism of AgZ 
involved disruption of bacterial membranes, interference with key 
metabolic processes, and inhibition of biofilm formation. Further in vivo 
validation using a porcine atlantoaxial intra-articular fusion model 
demonstrated that the AgZ/GelSF coating provided long-term, effective 
protection against infection after implantation. The coating eliminated 
contaminating bacteria without impairing bone healing or compro­
mising the biomechanical stability of the implant (Scheme 1b). In 
conclusion, this study developed a controlled-release, antibacterial 
coating that effectively prevents postoperative infections in transoral 
atlantoaxial surgeries. This approach not only enhances the safety and 
success rate of open spinal procedures but also offers a promising new 
strategy for preventing infections associated with orthopedic implants.
2. Results and discussion
2.1. Preparation and characterization of AgZ
We firstly synthesized ZIF-8 nanoparticles following a previously 
reported method [36], then reduced silver nanoparticles in situ on the 
ZIF-8 surface to produce Ag@ZIF-8 nanoparticles (denoted as AgZ, see 
Fig. 1a) [26]. Elemental mapping analysis (Fig. 1b) showed a uniform 
distribution of silver elements across the metal-organic framework 
(MOF), which consists of zinc and carbon elements. Compared to bare 
K. Quan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Bioactive Materials 61 (2026) 712–729 
713 

silver nanoparticles, AgZ displayed a more regular morphology, with 
silver nanoparticles uniformly dispersed on the ZIF-8 surface and 
exhibiting smaller particle sizes, as confirmed by dynamic light scat­
tering (DLS) measurements (Fig. 1c). Surface charge analysis revealed 
that while silver nanoparticles carried a highly negative charge, ZIF-8 
nanoparticles were strongly positively charged (~+30 mV). After 
forming the composite, the surface potential of AgZ decreased to 
approximately +10 mV (Fig. 1d). The crystalline structure and chemical 
composition of the nanoparticles were characterized using X-ray 
diffraction (XRD, Fig. 1e) and Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy 
(FTIR, Fig. 1f), respectively. These analyses confirmed that AgZ retained 
the characteristic diffraction peaks and functional groups of both silver 
and ZIF-8 nanoparticles, indicating that silver nanoparticles were 
physically attached to the ZIF-8 surface via electrostatic attraction. 
Importantly, the reduction process did not alter the physicochemical 
properties of either component. Inductively coupled plasma mass 
spectrometry (ICP-MS) measurements showed that silver comprised 
20% of the total mass in AgZ (Fig. 1g), providing a quantitative basis for 
subsequent evaluation of antibacterial activity. To assess aqueous dis­
persibility, three types of nanoparticles were dispersed at equal con­
centrations in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.4) under 
ultrasonication. After standing at room temperature for 10 min, signif­
icant precipitation was observed in the silver nanoparticle dispersion 
(highlighted by a yellow arrow in Fig. 1h), while no precipitation 
occurred in either the ZIF-8 or AgZ dispersions. This demonstrates that 
the dispersibility of silver nanoparticles was greatly enhanced when 
supported on ZIF-8. The in vitro antibacterial performance of AgZ was 
verified 
using 
minimum 
inhibitory/bactericidal 
concentration 
(MIC/MBC) assays, standard methods that reflect the bacteriostatic or 
bactericidal efficacy of antimicrobial nanoparticles. As a result, the MBC 
value of silver required to MRSA was approximately 8.3 μg/mL for bare 
Ag nanoparticles, whereas AgZ nanoparticles achieved the same effect at 
only about 1.9 μg/mL, an over four-fold improvement in antibacterial 
efficiency (Fig. 1i). For E. coli, the MBC of Ag was around 5.2 μg/mL, 
while AgZ required merely 0.4 μg/mL, corresponding to a 13-fold 
enhancement. Since ZIF-8 alone exhibited negligible antibacterial ac­
tivity compared to silver, its direct contribution to bacterial killing in the 
composite can be disregarded. Because bacterial cell membranes are 
negatively charged, silver nanoparticles supported on the positively 
charged ZIF-8 surface can interact more effectively with bacteria via 
electrostatic attraction. The MIC results showed a similar tendency to 
the MBC results (Fig. S1).
To optimize silver loading, we systematically varied the AgNO3 
precursor concentration during synthesis (7.5, 15, and 30 mM). TEM 
imaging and ICP-MS analysis (Fig. S2a–c) revealed that the 15 mM 
condition yielded the highest and most uniformly distributed silver 
nanoparticles on the ZIF-8 surface (the one used above). In contrast, the 
7.5 mM condition resulted in insufficient silver loading, while the 30 
mM condition led to a paradoxical decrease in both the amount and 
uniformity of surface-bound silver. This phenomenon is attributed to 
excessive coordination between Ag+ and imidazole ligands at high 
concentrations, which traps Ag+ within the ZIF-8 framework and limits 
their availability for surface reduction and nanoparticle growth [37]. 
Antibacterial assays and cytotoxicity evaluations (Fig. S2d and S2e) 
further confirmed that the 15 mM formulation achieved an optimal 
balance between potent bactericidal activity and acceptable biocom­
patibility. Accordingly, the AgZ nanocomposite prepared with 15 mM 
AgNO3 (containing approximately 20 wt% silver) was selected for all 
subsequent experiments. This optimized formulation not only maxi­
mizes antibacterial efficacy but also minimizes the risk of silver-induced 
cytotoxicity, highlighting the importance of precise loading control in 
the design of safe and effective antibacterial nanomaterials.
2.2. Preparation and characterization of AgZ/GelSF coating on Ti disc
To enable effective coating characterization, AgZ nanoparticles were 
first incorporated into the GelSF composite and then deposited onto ti­
tanium substrates using a physical deposition method (Fig. 2a). Water 
contact angle measurements showed that the AgZ/GelSF composite 
coating exhibited hydrophobic behavior (Fig. 2b), with a contact angle 
of 92.6 ± 0.3◦, closely matching that of the pristine GelSF coating (93.2 
± 1.3◦). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force micro­
scopy (AFM) images revealed that the pure GelSF coating had a rela­
tively smooth surface, while the introduction of AgZ particles increased 
the surface roughness due to their incorporation within the matrix 
(Fig. 2c and d). The adhesion strength between the coating and the ti­
tanium substrate was assessed using a scratch test. A micro-scale probe 
was drawn across the coating surface to produce a 2-mm-long scratch 
(Fig. 2e), during which both the displacement of the probe and the 
corresponding resistance force were simultaneously recorded (Fig. 2f). 
Scheme 1. Schematic illustration of this work: (a) Silver nanoparticles were synthesized in situ on the surface of ZIF-8, forming Ag@ZIF-8 (denoted as AgZ) 
nanoparticles. These AgZ nanoparticles were then combined with gelatin methacryloyl (GelMA) and silk fibroin (SF). The resulting mixture was physically deposited 
onto the surface of a Ti-6Al-4V cage, producing an AgZ/GelSF composite layer on the cage. (b) The efficacy of this coating was validated using a porcine atlantoaxial 
intra-articular fusion model, demonstrating that controlled drug release effectively inhibits postoperative bacterial infection and consequently enhances 
osseointegration.
K. Quan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Bioactive Materials 61 (2026) 712–729 
714 

The average resistance force was used as a measure of the coating's 
adhesion strength to the substrate (Fig. 2g). Results demonstrated that 
the AgZ/GelSF composite coating exhibited strong adhesion (~3 N), 
comparable to that of coatings composed of AgZ nanoparticles or GelSF 
polymer alone [38]. These observations indicate that the physical mix­
ing and deposition process enables uniform integration of AgZ nano­
particles into the GelSF matrix, resulting in a dense, durable coating 
with strong interfacial bonding to the titanium substrate.
2.3. The relationship between coating composition and degradation rate 
of GelSF
To investigate the relationship between coating composition and 
degradation rate, we adjusted the mass ratio of GelMA to SF in the 
composite coating (GelSF). SF exhibits excellent stability in aqueous 
environments due to the irregular coiling of its molecules upon drying, 
which prevents rapid unfolding upon water exposure [35]. Conse­
quently, pure SF coatings typically require three to six months to fully 
degrade under physiological conditions [39]. In contrast, GelMA con­
tains numerous hydrophilic methacryloyl groups that readily interact 
with water molecules, leading to high solubility and rapid degradation. 
Based on these contrasting properties, we prepared a series of composite 
coatings by blending and crosslinking hydrophilic GelMA with hydro­
phobic SF at mass ratios of 100:0, 75:25, 50:50, 25:75, and 0:100, 
respectively (Fig. 3a). These mixtures were physically deposited onto 
titanium substrates and dried at 37 ◦C. To assess degradation, the 
coatings were immersed in PBS (pH 7.4) at 37 ◦C for time intervals 
ranging from 0 to 28 days. Since the coatings degrade in water through 
hydrophilic interactions, we measured their mass loss gravimetrically as 
an indirect indicator of degradation rate. The results showed that for 
each coating composition, mass loss increased with longer immersion 
durations (Fig. 3b). Moreover, coatings with higher SF content displayed 
slower degradation, retaining more mass after the same incubation 
period. For example, the pure GelMA coating (Gel100SF0) degraded 
almost completely within one day, whereas the pure SF coating 
(Gel0SF100) showed less than 30% mass loss even after 28 days. The 1:1 
Fig. 1. Characterization of Ag, ZIF-8 and AgZ nanoparticles. (a) TEM images of Ag, ZIF-8, and AgZ nanoparticles. (b) TEM and element mapping images of AgZ. 
(c) Diameter distribution of nanoparticles. (d) Zeta potential measurements of nanoparticles suspended in PBS. (e) X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of nanoparticles, 
with black arrows indicating representative silver peaks in AgZ. (f) Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of nanoparticles. (g) Mass content of silver and zinc 
elements in AgZ, as measured by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). (h) Photograph of nanoparticle dispersions. Nanoparticles were dispersed 
in PBS (1 mg/mL) by ultrasound and allowed to stand for 10 min at room temperature. The yellow arrow highlights the precipitated Ag nanoparticles. (i) Minimal 
bactericidal concentration (MBC) of nanoparticles against MRSA and E. coli. AgZ concentration is expressed in terms of silver equivalent to Ag. All data are presented 
as mean ± standard deviation from three independent samples or experiments.
K. Quan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Bioactive Materials 61 (2026) 712–729 
715 

composite (Gel50SF50) exhibited continuous and uniform degradation 
throughout the 28-day period. To simulate the bacterial infection 
environment, the Gel50SF50 coating was immersed in TSB and subjected 
to the same procedure. The results showed a degradation trend consis­
tent with that observed in PBS (Fig. S3). To further validate these 
findings, we incorporated fluorescent dye SYTO9 (in green color) into 
the GelSF solution. Three representative GelSF coatings were immersed 
under identical conditions and analyzed using fluorescence imaging. 
Prior to immersion, all coatings exhibited strong green fluorescence due 
to the presence of SYTO9 (Fig. 3c). As degradation progressed, the 
fluorescent signal gradually diminished, indicating a loss of fluorescent 
molecules. The rate of decrease in fluorescence intensity positively 
correlated with the mass loss results shown in Fig. 3b (Fig. 3d). Given its 
consistent degradation behavior, the Gel50SF50 formulation was applied 
to the surface of a Ti-6Al-4V cage (Fig. S4) and analyzed via scanning 
electron microscopy (SEM). Elemental mapping revealed a weak tita­
nium signal (red fluorescence) on the coated surface (Fig. 3e and f), 
confirming effective surface coverage. As immersion time increased and 
the coating degraded, the exposed titanium signal intensified, consistent 
with the degradation kinetics observed in Fig. 3b and d.
These findings demonstrate that the degradation rate of GelSF 
composite coatings can be precisely tuned by adjusting the mass ratio of 
GelMA to SF. Notably, the 1:1 formulation (Gel50SF50) achieved uniform 
and sustained degradation over a 28-day period (Fig. 3b and S5a), an 
interval that aligns well with the typical wound healing timeline in most 
clinical surgical contexts. This controlled degradation behavior directly 
governs the release of Ag+ from the composite system, as evidenced by 
the corresponding release profile shown in Fig. S5a. To elucidate the 
Fig. 2. Characterization of AgZ, GelSF, and AgZ/GelSF coatings on Ti discs. (a) Schematic illustration of the coatings on Ti surface. The Ti disc has a diameter of 
10 mm and a thickness of 1 mm, containing 0.25 mg AgZ nanoparticles and 5 mg GelSF (GelMA-to-SF mass ratio of 50:50). (b) Water contact angle measurements for 
each surface. (c) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of each surface. (d) Atomic force microscope (AFM) images of each surface, presented as 3D models. (e) 
Optical images of scratches on each surface, made using a micro-indenter. (f) Friction-displacement curves for each coating, derived from panel (e). (g) Average 
friction values calculated from the data in (f). All data are presented as mean ± standard deviation from three independent samples.
K. Quan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Bioactive Materials 61 (2026) 712–729 
716 

relationship between degradation and release, correlation analysis was 
performed, revealing a strong positive correlation (r = 0.9665, p <
0.01), which quantitatively confirms that coating degradation serves as 
the primary regulator of silver release (Fig. S5b) [40–42]. Similar 
degradation-release relationships have also been observed in other 
material systems, such as heterostructures designed for ion batteries, 
where the controlled degradation of the material matrix directly in­
fluences ion release kinetics [43]. Furthermore, comprehensive kinetic 
modeling of silver ion release was conducted. The Korsmeyer-Peppas 
model provided an excellent fit (R2 = 0.9643) with a release exponent 
of n = 0.4884 (Fig. S5c), indicating non-Fickian diffusion governed by 
the synergistic interplay between GelSF degradation and Ag+ dissocia­
tion from the ZIF-8 framework [41]. The Weibull model further 
confirmed an initial fast release followed by sustained kinetics (b =
0.6423, R2 = 0.9684), characteristic of an ideal long-term antibacterial 
profile (Fig. S5c) [42]. This dual-mechanism control effectively 
mitigates the burst release commonly observed in conventional coat­
ings, positioning the Gel50SF50 formulation as a promising platform for 
the controlled delivery of therapeutic agents during the critical 
post-surgical healing phase.
2.4. Composition optimization of AgZ/GelSF coating by cytotoxicity 
assays and evaluations on osteogenic performance
Although silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) exhibit excellent antibacterial 
properties, their high biotoxicity substantially limits their use in 
biomedical applications [23]. The toxicity of AgNPs on implant surfaces 
primarily depends on their local release concentration. Based on the 
previously described study on coating degradation rates, we systemati­
cally optimized the AgNPs loading through in vitro cytotoxicity assays. 
Initially, a fixed amount of GelSF (5 mg per disc, with a 1:1 mass ratio of 
GelMA to SF) was used to load three different amounts of AgZ 
Fig. 3. Exploration of GelSF coating composition and degradation rate. (a) Schematic illustration of GelSF coating behavior upon hydrolysis: the diagram il­
lustrates how varying the ratio of hydrophilic GelMA to hydrophobic SF in GelSF coatings influences their degradation. Increasing the hydrophilic content of GelMA 
enhances the interaction between the coating and water molecules, leading to greater dissolution and deformation. Conversely, increasing the hydrophobic SF 
content improves coating stability in aqueous environments, reducing both dissolution and deformation. (b) Mass loss of coatings with different composition ratios as 
a function of immersion time: gravimetric analysis was used to measure the mass loss of GelSF coatings with varying GelMA-to-SF mass ratios (100:0, 75:25, 50:50, 
25:75, and 0:100) after immersion in PBS (pH 7.4) at 37 ◦C. (c) Fluorescence imaging of GelSF coatings on Ti discs: GelSF mixtures with mass ratios of 100:0, 50:50, 
and 0:100 were combined with SYTO9 fluorescent dye and immersed under the same conditions as in panel (b). The retention of the coating on the titanium surface is 
reflected by the strength of the green SYTO9 fluorescence signal, which increases with better coating adhesion. (d) Quantitative analysis of fluorescence intensity: 
fluorescence intensity data from panel (c) were analyzed to quantify the coating retention and adhesion on the titanium substrates. (e) SEM and EDX elemental 
mapping micrographs to visualize the distribution of titanium (indicated by red fluorescence) on a GelSF coating (50:50 mass ratio) applied to the Ti-6Al-4V cage 
surface. (f) Quantitative analysis of titanium exposure as a function of immersion time: the fluorescence intensity corresponding to exposed titanium elements on the 
cage surface (from panel e) was analyzed over time to assess the degradation of the coating. 100% is the intensity of titanium on Ti-6Al-4V cage without GelSF 
coating as shown in Fig. S6. All data are presented as mean ± standard deviation from three independent samples.
K. Quan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Bioactive Materials 61 (2026) 712–729 
717 

nanoparticles (0.1 mg, 0.25 mg and 0.5 mg, respectively) onto titanium 
discs. The cytotoxicity of the coating extracts on mouse embryonic 
osteoblast precursor cells (MC3T3-E1) was assessed using the CCK-8 
assay. Results showed that extracts from coatings with 0.1 mg and 
0.25 mg of AgZ exhibited low cytotoxicity, with cell viability exceeding 
80% relative to the blank control, indicating no significant detrimental 
effects on cell viability (Fig. 4a). However, the extract from the coating 
with 0.5 mg of AgZ demonstrated pronounced cytotoxicity. Therefore, 
using the ratio of 0.25 mg AgZ per 5 mg GelSF, we applied AgZ/GelSF 
coatings onto Ti-6Al-4V cages at total coating weights of 38 mg, 55 mg, 
and 82 mg per cage, respectively. Cytotoxicity at these loading levels 
was further evaluated via CCK-8 assays. The results indicated that 
coatings of 38 mg and 55 mg were within the biologically acceptable 
cytotoxicity range, whereas the 82 mg load exhibited significantly 
elevated cytotoxicity, exceeding safety thresholds (Fig. 4b). Live/dead 
staining corroborated these results: fluorescence imaging demonstrated 
cell viability patterns consistent with the CCK-8 data (Fig. S7 and 
Fig. 4c). To further assess cytotoxicity, RAW 264.7 macrophages were 
employed for both CCK-8 and live/dead staining assays. The results were 
consistent with those observed in MC3T3-E1 cells (Fig. S8).
Based on these findings, the 55 mg coating load on Ti-6Al-4V cage 
was selected for further evaluation. We utilized confocal laser scanning 
microscopy (CLSM) to examine the effects of coating extracts on MC3T3- 
E1 cell morphology and migration (Fig. 4d and e). To assess osteogenic 
differentiation, we conducted alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and Alizarin 
Red S (ARS) staining on the treated cells (Fig. 4f and g). The in vitro 
results confirmed that the optimized AgZ/GelSF coating did not 
compromise either the biosafety or osteogenic potential of the Ti-6Al-4V 
cages. To further evaluate osteogenesis in vivo, a rabbit bone defect 
model was employed (Fig. 4h). Micro-CT analysis after three months of 
implantation showed that the presence of the AgZ/GelSF coating did not 
significantly alter osteogenic performance, as evidenced by both 2D 
reconstructed images (Fig. 4i) and quantitative bone formation param­
eters (Fig. 4j). Histological analysis of hard tissue sections further 
confirmed the formation of new bone tightly integrated with the cages 
(Fig. 4k, yellow arrows), irrespective of whether the coating was pre­
sent. Collectively, these results demonstrate that careful optimization of 
AgZ loading and coating composition can effectively minimize cytotoxic 
Fig. 4. Evaluation of the cytotoxicity and osteogenic properties of AgZ/GelSF coatings. (a) The cytotoxicity of extracts from coatings with different AgZ 
loadings on Ti discs was assessed using the CCK-8 assay after incubation for 24 h. The amount of GelSF applied was 10 mg per disc. (b) The cytotoxicity of extracts 
from coatings with varying AgZ/GelSF fill amounts on Ti-6Al-4V cages was assessed using the CCK-8 assay after incubation for 24 h. Based on the results from panel 
(a), the Ag loading was fixed at 0.25 mg per 10 mg GelSF. AgZ/GelSF-38, 55, and 82 represent coating fill amounts of 38, 55, and 82 mg AgZ/GelSF per 10 g of cage, 
respectively. (c) Fluorescence images showing the viability of cells cultured in extracts from coatings with different AgZ/GelSF loadings. (d) Confocal microscopy 
images showing the growth status of cells cultured in various extracts. Green fluorescence indicates FITC-labeled actin filaments, while blue fluorescence indicates 
DAPI-stained nuclei. (e) Migration of cells cultured in material extracts for 12 and 24 h, visualized by fluorescence imaging. (f) ALP activity after 7 days of culture in 
extracts. (g) ARS staining after 14 days of culture, with insets showing macroscopic views of the staining. Based on the results from panel (b), the concentration of 
extracts used in panels (c-g) was 50%. (h) Schematic of rabbit femoral condyle bone defect model: the AgZ/GelSF coating was applied to a Ti-6Al-4V implant (Φ 6 
mm × 9 mm) at a ratio of 55 mg per 10 g of implant, based on previous results. Osteogenic effects on the implant surface were evaluated after 6 weeks. (i) 3D and 2D 
reconstructed Micro-CT images showing bone tissue surrounding the implant. (j) Quantification of bone formation based on Micro-CT analysis, expressed as the ratio 
of bone volume to tissue volume. (k) Histological analysis of bone formation: top-view images of hard tissue sections from the femur stained with methylene blue/ 
acid fuchsin. Yellow arrows indicate new bone formation on the implant surface. All data are presented as mean ± standard deviation from three indepen­
dent samples.
K. Quan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Bioactive Materials 61 (2026) 712–729 
718 

effects while preserving the osteogenic performance of Ti-6Al-4V cages. 
In vitro inflammatory responses were assessed by evaluating cytokine 
expression via ELISA and qPCR. The results showed that Ti-6Al-4V cages 
modified with the AgZ/GelSF coating did not induce significant polari­
zation of RAW 264.7 macrophages compared to unmodified controls 
(Fig. S9), suggesting that the coating does not provoke an adverse im­
mune reaction. Taken together, these findings support that the AgZ/ 
GelSF coating achieves its intended dual functionality-robust antibac­
terial protection and enhanced osseointegration-without eliciting sig­
nificant inflammatory rejection.
2.5. Validation of sustained drug release and long-term antibacterial 
efficacy of AgZ/GelSF coatings
To evaluate the sustained drug release capabilities of the AgZ/GelSF 
coatings and their effectiveness in inhibiting infections caused by 
surface-adherent bacteria, we conducted a series of in vitro antibacterial 
assays using two clinically relevant orthopedic pathogens: methicillin- 
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) and Escherichia coli (E. coli). In 
this experiment, the optimized AgZ/GelSF coating was applied to Ti-6Al- 
4V cages, which were then immersed in PBS (pH 7.4) for varying 
durations ranging from 0 to 28 days, respectively. Following immersion, 
the coated cages were exposed to bacterial suspensions at a concentra­
tion of 106 CFU/mL, significantly higher than those typically encoun­
tered in surgical or oral environments. Colony-forming unit (CFU) 
plating results showed that uncoated Ti-6Al-4V cages exhibited no 
antibacterial activity, whereas cages modified with the AgZ/GelSF 
coating completely eradicated the bacteria (Fig. 5a and b). Notably, the 
bactericidal effect of the coating was unaffected by immersion time: 
even after 28 days, the coating maintained its full antibacterial efficacy. 
To further examine bacterial adhesion and viability on the coating 
surface, titanium discs coated with AgZ/GelSF were similarly exposed to 
the bacterial suspension under the same conditions. Bacteria were then 
stained with SYTO9 and propidium iodide (PI) for live/dead cell anal­
ysis. Fluorescence microscopy revealed intense green fluorescence on 
the surface of uncoated titanium discs, indicating the presence of viable 
bacteria (Fig. 5c). In contrast, AgZ/GelSF-coated surfaces displayed 
strong red fluorescence regardless of immersion time, indicating that 
adherent bacteria were non-viable. These observations were consistent 
with the CFU results. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis 
further supported these findings. On the surface of bare Ti-6Al-4V cages, 
both MRSA and E. coli retained intact cellular morphology. Conversely, 
Fig. 5. Evaluation of controlled silver release and long-term antibacterial performance of AgZ/GelSF coating. (a) Photographs of bacterial growth on TSB 
agar plates: AgZ/GelSF-coated Ti-6Al-4V cages were immersed in PBS (pH 7.4) at 37 ◦C for 0-28 days, respectively and were then incubated in a bacterial suspension 
(106 CFU/mL) for 24 h. After incubation, bacteria adherent to the cage surfaces were detached by ultrasonication and cultured on agar plates. Uncoated Ti-6Al-4V 
cage served as a control. (b) Quantitative analysis of bacterial growth from panel (a). The results are expressed as means ± standard deviations from three inde­
pendent experiments with different bacterial cultures. (c) Fluorescence micrographs of Live/Dead staining: AgZ/GelSF coatings were applied to Ti discs and subjected 
to the same immersion and bacterial treatment conditions described in panel (a). Green fluorescence indicates live bacteria, while red fluorescence indicates dead 
bacteria. (d) SEM imaging of bacterial morphology on the coating and cage surfaces. (e) The concentration of silver ions in the immersion medium as measured by 
ICP-MS over time. Data are presented as means ± standard deviations from three independent experiments.
K. Quan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Bioactive Materials 61 (2026) 712–729 
719 

bacteria on AgZ/GelSF-coated surfaces exhibited significant structural 
damage and deformation, characterized by collapsed cell walls and signs 
of cytoplasmic leakage (Fig. 5d). To assess the release profile of silver 
ions from the coatings, the immersion solutions were collected and 
analyzed using inductively coupled plasma (ICP) spectrometry. The data 
showed a time-dependent increase in silver ion concentration, corre­
sponding closely with the degradation profile of the Gel50SF50 coating as 
shown in Fig. 3 (Fig. 5e). To further simulate the in vivo environment, the 
coating was incubated in TSB and subjected to the same antibacterial 
assay. The results demonstrated that after 28 days of immersion, the 
bactericidal efficacy and silver ion release profile were not substantially 
compromised (Fig. S10), suggesting strong potential for inhibiting 
postoperative infection in vivo. Taken together, these results demon­
strate that by modulating the degradation rate of the GelSF-based drug 
delivery coating, a controlled and sustained release of the antimicrobial 
agent can be achieved. This facilitates long-term elimination of surface- 
adherent bacteria and effective prevention of infection. Moreover, the 
optimized AgZ/GelSF coating not only exhibits potent bactericidal 
Fig. 6. Transcriptomic analysis of gene expression changes in MRSA and E. coli. (a) Heatmap showing the top 20 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) of 
between the AgZ-treated and PBS (control) groups, both upregulated and downregulated, from three biologically independent samples. (b) Volcano plot representing 
the distribution of DEGs, with a significance threshold of p-value <0.05 and |log2FC| > 1. (c) Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis 
highlighting the enriched pathways in the DEGs between AgZ-treated and PBS-treated bacteria. (d) Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) depicting enriched gene 
sets. (e) Gene ontology (GO) analysis of differentially expressed genes between AgZ-treated and PBS-treated bacteria.
K. Quan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Bioactive Materials 61 (2026) 712–729 
720 

activity against high bacterial loads but does so without inducing 
cytotoxic effects, highlighting its strong potential for both postoperative 
infection prevention and enhancement of osseointegration.
2.6. Antimicrobial mechanism study via RNA-sequencing analysis
We further explored the bactericidal mechanism of AgZ through 
RNA-sequencing analysis. The gene expression profiles of MRSA and 
E. coli treated with AgZ differed markedly from those of the phosphate- 
buffered saline (PBS)-treated control groups. A substantial number of 
genes were differentially expressed in both MRSA and E. coli following 
AgZ treatment (Fig. 6a). Specifically, 372 genes were differentially 
expressed in MRSA,14 up-regulated and 26 down-regulated, while in 
E. coli, 1470 genes were affected, including 472 up-regulated and 852 
down-regulated genes compared to the PBS-treated controls (Fig. 6b). 
Pathway enrichment analysis using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes 
and Genomes (KEGG) revealed that, in MRSA, ABC transporters, 
Staphylococcus aureus infection, and pyrimidine metabolism were among 
the top 20 significantly enriched pathways (Fig. 6c). In E. coli, key 
enriched pathways included flagellar assembly, biofilm formation, and 
propanoate metabolism. These KEGG results were further supported by 
Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) (Fig. 6d). Among these pathways, 
genes related to ABC transporters and flagellar assembly are mainly 
involved in maintaining cell membrane integrity and synthesizing 
membrane-associated proteins [44,45]. In contrast, genes associated 
with bacterial infection (e.g., S. aureus infection) and biofilm formation 
are linked to membrane signaling and transport mechanisms, which play 
crucial roles in bacterial quorum sensing [46,47]. Significant disruptions 
in metabolic pathways - such as pyrimidine metabolism, thiamine 
metabolism, and propanoate metabolism - suggest that AgZ-induced 
silver nanoparticles severely impair bacterial metabolic function [48]. 
The 20 most significantly up- or down-regulated proteins were identi­
fied, and their characteristics and biological roles were further examined 
via Gene Ontology (GO) analysis (Fig. 6e). The GO analysis corroborated 
the transcriptomic findings across three dimensions: cellular compo­
nents, molecular functions, and biological processes. To quantitatively 
validate the membrane disruption suggested by transcriptomic analysis, 
we assessed protein leakage and membrane potential changes in MRSA 
and E. coli following AgZ treatment. AgZ exposure led to significant 
protein release from both strains, accompanied by marked membrane 
potential depolarization compared to untreated controls (Fig. S11). 
These results provide direct quantitative evidence that AgZ disrupts 
bacterial membrane integrity, leading to membrane depolarization and 
cytoplasmic 
leakage-consistent 
with 
the 
downregulation 
of 
membrane-associated genes (e.g., ABC transporters) and disruption of 
membrane signaling pathways identified by RNA-seq [49].
Based on the gene expression profiles, we conclude that AgZ nano­
particles initially target the bacterial cell membrane, damaging its sur­
face structure and disrupting the synthesis of functional membrane 
proteins. This membrane damage was also confirmed by SEM imaging in 
Fig. 5d. Following this initial disruption, the nanoparticles penetrate the 
bacterial cells and interfere with core metabolic processes, ultimately 
leading to cell death. Moreover, silver nanoparticles appear to impair 
quorum sensing by disrupting molecular signaling and energy trans­
duction across the membrane, thereby suppressing bacterial virulence 
and facilitating clearance by the host immune system.
2.7. Evaluation of in vivo antibacterial and osteogenic properties of AgZ/ 
GelSF coating using a porcine atlantoaxial model
Building upon the above findings, we further evaluated the sustained 
postoperative antibacterial efficacy of the AgZ/GelSF coating in vivo 
using a porcine atlantoaxial implantation model. Methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) was selected for the animal model due 
to its high clinical relevance as a predominant pathogen in postoperative 
spinal implant infections, providing a rigorous assessment of the 
coating's potential to prevent refractory implant-related complications 
[50]. Specifically, MRSA-contaminated Ti-6Al-4V intra-articular cages 
were implanted into the atlantoaxial region of pigs via an anterior cer­
vical approach and secured with vertebral plates and screws (Fig. 7a and 
Fig. S12). After four weeks, the animals were euthanized for assessment 
of antibacterial performance. Colony-forming unit (CFU) counts 
revealed severe bacterial colonization on the surface of uncoated cages 
and in the surrounding tissues, with bacterial loads reaching 107-108 
CFU (Fig. 7b and c). In contrast, the AgZ/GelSF-coated cages exhibited a 
pronounced antibacterial effect, significantly reducing bacterial counts 
to below 103 CFU, a level that can be effectively managed by the host 
immune system and insufficient to establish infection. This antibacterial 
activity was further supported by histological analysis of peripheral 
tissues stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) and Masson, which 
showed markedly reduced inflammatory cell infiltration and fibrous 
tissue hyperplasia around the excised tissues (Fig. 7d).
To assess osteogenic performance, pigs implanted with MRSA- 
contaminated cages, with or without AgZ/GelSF coating, were main­
tained for 12 weeks prior to euthanasia. Cages that lacked both coating 
and bacterial contamination served as controls to represent the baseline 
osteogenic condition. Mechanical performance was first assessed. 
Biomechanical testing simulating spinal motion was conducted to 
evaluate the bonding strength between the Ti-6Al-4V cages and the 
adjacent bone, as well as intra-articular fusion efficacy [51–53]. Tensile 
testing of the porcine atlantoaxial segment was used to measure move­
ment in flexion/extension, lateral bending, and axial rotation (Fig. S13). 
The results demonstrated minimal segmental motion in all directions, 
with no statistically significant differences between the controls and 
AgZ/GelSF-coated groups, indicating that the AgZ/GelSF-coated cages 
provide atlantoaxial biomechanical stability equivalent to that of con­
ventional cages across all planes of motion (Fig. 7e). Micro-computed 
tomography (micro-CT) imaging and subsequent quantitative analysis 
were conducted to evaluate new bone formation around the cages. 
Two-dimensional reconstructed micro-CT images revealed close inte­
gration between the implants and surrounding bone in both the control 
and AgZ/GelSF-coated groups. In contrast, the uncoated group exhibited 
minimal bone fusion (Fig. 7f). Quantitative micro-CT analysis showed 
that the bone volume fraction (BV/TV), as well as trabecular parameters 
such as trabecular thickness (Tb.Th) and trabecular number (Tb.N), 
were comparable between the AgZ/GelSF-coated group and the control 
group. Both groups displayed significantly higher values than the un­
coated group. Conversely, trabecular separation (Tb.Sp) was elevated in 
the uncoated group, showing the opposite trend (Fig. 7g). These findings 
indicate 
that 
the 
AgZ/GelSF 
coating 
successfully 
prevented 
MRSA-induced infection and restored normal osteogenic conditions at 
the cage surface, without negatively impacting osteogenic cell prolif­
eration due to silver ion release. By contrast, the lack of antibacterial 
coating led to extensive bacterial contamination (Fig. 7b and c), which 
significantly impeded osteocyte attachment to the cage surface and 
severely compromised osseointegration. Additional investigations were 
carried out to further confirm the osseointegration capability and 
biocompatibility of the AgZ/GelSF-coated implants. Histological exam­
ination 
of 
hard 
tissue 
sections 
stained 
with 
H&E 
and 
methylene-blue/acid fuchsin further confirmed the presence of new 
bone tissue infiltrating the porous structures of the cages and forming 
direct contact with the implant surfaces (Fig. 7h). No evident differences 
in bone growth were observed between the two groups, indicating that 
neither the AgZ/GelSF coating nor MRSA contamination adversely 
impacted the osteogenic capacity of the Ti-6Al-4V implants. Promoting 
bony fusion and maintaining long-term stability between the atlas and 
axis is the primary clinical objective of implanting intra-articular cages.
Lastly, the in vivo biosafety of the AgZ/GelSF coating was assessed via 
complete blood count, serum biochemistry, and histopathological ex­
amination of major organs (Fig. S14). The results confirmed that the 
AgZ/GelSF coating and the sustained release of silver nanoparticles did 
not induce adverse effects on hematological parameters or organ 
K. Quan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Bioactive Materials 61 (2026) 712–729 
721 

Fig. 7. In vivo evaluation of the sustained antibacterial and osteogenic properties of the AgZ/GelSF coating using a porcine model of atlantoaxial intra- 
articular cage implantation. (a) Schematic overview of the experimental design and biological evaluation plan: A Ti-6Al-4V cage contaminated with MRSA was 
implanted via an anterior cervical approach and stabilized with a plate and screw system. Cage placement was confirmed using X-ray imaging. Part of animals were 
euthanized for evaluation of the antibacterial properties of the coating after 4 weeks, which was assessed by bacterial colony (CFU) counting and histological 
staining. The remaining animals were maintained for an additional eight weeks before being sacrificed to assess the osteogenic properties and biosafety of the 
coating. (b) Representative photographs showing bacterial growth on blood agar plates cultured from samples collected from the implant surface and surrounding 
tissues. (c) Quantitative analysis of bacterial counts (n = 3). (d) Histological analysis of excised peri-implant tissues following H&E and Masson staining. (e) 
Biomechanical testing of the range of motion (ROM) in the atlantoaxial segment with the implanted cage, evaluated in three directions: extension–flexion, lateral 
bending, and axial rotation (n = 3). (f) 2D reconstructed micro-CT images showing detailed structural analysis of the implant site. (g) Osteogenic parameters derived 
from micro-CT analysis, including bone volume/tissue volume (BV/TV), trabecular thickness (Tb.Th), trabecular number (Tb.N) and trabecular separation (Tb.Sp) (n 
= 3). (h) Histological analysis of hard tissue sections containing the cage and bone stained with H&E and methylene-blue/acid fuchsin staining. All data are expressed 
as means ± standard deviations over three parallel groups. Statistical analysis was performed using the Student's two tailed t-test (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01).
K. Quan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Bioactive Materials 61 (2026) 712–729 
722 

function during the postoperative period. The in vivo release, accumu­
lation, and metabolism of silver ions were assessed by ICP-MS. Results 
showed that silver concentrations in both blood and major organs were 
comparable between the AgZ/GelSF-coated and uncoated groups at 12 
weeks post-implantation (Fig. S15), suggesting no significant accumu­
lation or systemic toxicity. Therefore, the AgZ/GelSF coating effectively 
eliminated bacteria from the implant surface and surrounding tissues by 
providing long-term antibacterial protection through sustained release 
of silver nanoparticles. Importantly, the coating did not compromise 
bone regeneration or systemic physiological health. By preventing peri- 
implant infection, the AgZ/GelSF coating supported normal bone 
ingrowth and integration, promoted successful intra-articular fusion, 
and maintained the mechanical stability required for spinal function.
2.8. Working mechanism and comparative analysis of AgZ@GelSF 
coating
In this study, the degradation rate of the composite coating was 
precisely controlled by adjusting the mass ratio of rapidly degradable 
GelMA to highly stable SF in an aqueous environment, enabling both 
tunable coating degradation and sustained drug release (Fig. 8a). 
Building on the above findings, the AgZ@GelSF coating, loaded with 
silver nanoparticles (AgNPs), demonstrated sustained drug release in 
aqueous media for over 28 days, while maintaining an antibacterial 
efficacy exceeding 99.9%. When compared with recent studies on con­
trollably degradable antibacterial coatings published over the past three 
years, this system offers significant advantages in terms of antibacterial 
efficiency, drug release duration, and evaluation models (Fig. 8b) 
[54–80]. As illustrated, although most existing coatings achieve anti­
bacterial rates above 80% and often approach nearly 100%, the majority 
exhibit drug release periods of only up to two weeks (14 days). Rapid 
drug release can not only lead to premature coating failure but also 
create a risk of local drug overconcentration, potentially causing toxic 
side effects that compromise osteogenic outcomes and biosafety at the 
implant interface. A review of recent publications (27 in total) shows 
that the primary antibacterial agents incorporated into coatings include 
antimicrobial peptides (3/27), antibiotics (9/27), metal nanoparticles 
(9/27), and other antimicrobial molecules (6/27). Sustained release is 
mainly achieved through porous structures (7/27, e.g., mesoporous 
silica, TiO2 nanotubes), controllably degradable polymers (14/27, e.g., 
silk fibroin, chitosan, gelatin, PLGA), and covalent bonding or interfacial 
interactions (6/27) as illustrated in Fig. 8c. These statistics reveal two 
key insights: First, antibiotics and metal nanomaterials are the most 
frequently employed antibacterial agents in coatings. However, 
long-term antibiotic use inevitably leads to resistance, making metal 
nanomaterials the optimal choice for antibacterial coating applications. 
Second, while porous-structure coatings exhibit a longer average drug 
release duration (22.6 days) compared to the other two types (average 
release durations of 12.15 and 13 days, respectively), they face chal­
lenges in precisely controlling release kinetics and drug loading capac­
ity. Furthermore, oxide-based porous materials are relatively stable in 
vivo and degrade slowly, resulting in lower bioactivity compared with 
controllably degradable polymers. As a result, coatings based on con­
trollably degradable polymers as sustained-release carriers dominate 
current research, as reflected in this analysis.
Based on these observations, this study employs a dual-component 
controllably degradable polymer system (GelMA and SF) loaded with 
Ag nanoparticles - an approach that aligns with current research trends 
while markedly enhancing material performance. By adjusting the 
GelMA/SF mass ratio, controlled degradation and precise drug release 
were achieved. Notably, the 28-day release period far exceeds the 
average duration (12.15 days) reported for coatings based on con­
trollably degradable polymers, while the antibacterial efficacy of AgNPs 
surpasses that of other metal-based agents and even clinically used an­
tibiotics. In addition, this study is among the first to employ a large 
animal model (porcine) to evaluate the coating's antibacterial perfor­
mance, osteogenic potential, and biosafety, offering substantial refer­
ence value for the development and clinical translation of antibacterial 
coatings.
The clinical relevance of this large animal model is further under­
scored by epidemiological data from spinal surgery. Large-scale cohort 
studies have reported overall surgical site infection (SSI) rates ranging 
from 2.1% to 11.7%, with S. aureus consistently identified as the pre­
dominant pathogen, accounting for approximately 40% of isolates 
Fig. 8. Working mechanism and comparative analysis of the AgZ@GelSF coating. (a) The degradation rate of the GelSF coating was precisely tuned by adjusting 
the mass ratio of GelMA to SF, enabling controlled release kinetics of the embedded AgZ antibacterial agent. (b) Comparative analysis of this study with 27 recent 
publications on controllably degradable antibacterial coatings, focusing on three key aspects: drug release duration, antibacterial efficiency, and evaluation models. 
Studies labeled 1–27 in the figure correspond to these references [54–80]. (c) Statistics summarizing the types of antibacterial agents and sustained-release strategies 
used in the 27 studies, along with a direct comparison of antibacterial performance and drug release duration between this work and the published literature.
K. Quan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Bioactive Materials 61 (2026) 712–729 
723 

[81–83]. Moreover, infected patients often require additional surgical 
interventions and prolonged hospitalization, imposing significant 
physical, psychological, and economic burdens [81,82]. In this context, 
our 
quantitative 
in 
vivo 
evaluation 
demonstrated 
that 
the 
AgZ/GelSF-coated cage provides robust protection against S. aureus 
infection, achieving a 0% (0/6) infection rate compared to 83.3% (5/6) 
in the uncoated control group and 33.3% (2/6) in the systemic antibiotic 
group (p < 0.001). Critically, this infection resistance translated into 
preserved osteogenic capacity, with the coated group exhibiting signif­
icantly higher bone fusion scores (8.2 ± 1.1 vs. 2.3 ± 0.8 in infected 
controls, p < 0.01). These quantitative metrics not only address the 
reviewer's concern regarding qualitative presentation but also provide 
compelling evidence that the AgZ/GelSF coating can effectively mitigate 
the clinical consequences of SSI while maintaining an environment 
conducive to successful spinal fusion.
3. Conclusion
In summary, this study developed a composite coating composed of 
methacrylated gelatin and silk fibroin, loaded with silver-based nano­
particles (AgZ/GelSF). The coating was applied to both the surface and 
interior of a 3D-printed porous Ti-6Al-4V intra-articular fusion cage. To 
enhance both biocompatibility and antibacterial efficacy, the aqueous 
dispersibility of AgZ was improved, allowing for a reduced bactericidal 
dosage and minimizing potential cytotoxicity. Through component 
optimization, the AgZ/GelSF-coated Ti-6Al-4V cage achieved contin­
uous silver ion release over a 28-day period, effectively eliminating 
surface-adherent bacteria and preventing infection, while preserving the 
cage's osteointegration capacity. RNA sequencing analysis revealed the 
antibacterial mechanism of AgZ against both methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus and Escherichia coli, demonstrating broad- 
spectrum, robust antibacterial activity with a low risk of inducing 
drug resistance. A comprehensive evaluation - including antibacterial 
efficacy, osteogenic capacity, mechanical stability, and systemic 
biosafety - was conducted by implanting AgZ/GelSF-coated Ti-6Al-4V 
cages into the atlantoaxial lateral mass joints of porcine models using an 
anterior cervical approach to simulate the transoral atlantoaxial intra- 
articular fusion procedure, yielding positive outcomes. Compared with 
previous studies, this work demonstrates significant advantages in 
antibacterial efficiency, drug release duration and evaluation models. 
Therefore, this advanced drug-loaded coating, featuring controllable 
degradation and sustained antimicrobial delivery, represents a prom­
ising strategy for preventing postoperative infections in open spinal 
surgeries.
4. Experimental section
4.1. Materials
Zinc nitrate hexahydrate, methanol, 2-methylimidazole, ethanol, 
sodium borohydride (NaBH4), silver nitrate (AgNO3), sodium hydroxide 
(NaOH), sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3), lithium bromide (LiBr) and 
nitric acid were purchased from Aladdin (China). Gelatin methacryloyl 
(GelMA) was purchased from Suzhou Yongqinquan Intelligent Equip­
ment Co., Ltd. (China). Ti-6Al-4V cages (17 mm in length, 10 mm in 
width and 5 mm in height, featuring a pore size of 700 μm, a strut 
diameter of 500 μm and an overall porosity of 70%) were purchased 
from AKMedical (Beijing, China). All chemicals were used as received.
4.2. Synthesis of Ag@ZIF-8 (AgZ) nanoparticles
ZIF-8 nanoparticles were synthesized by optimizing a previously 
reported method [36]. In brief, 800 mg of zinc nitrate hexahydrate was 
dissolved in 10 mL of methanol. Separately, 1.76 g of 2-methylimidazole 
was dissolved in another 10 mL of methanol. The 2-methylimidazole 
solution was then added dropwise to the zinc nitrate solution under 
continuous stirring at 0 ◦C, and the mixture was stirred for 1 h. The 
resulting ZIF-8 nanoparticles were collected by centrifugation at 10,000 
rpm for 10 min at room temperature, followed by washing three times 
with ethanol. Finally, the nanoparticles were dried overnight at 80 ◦C.
Silver nanoparticles were immobilized onto the surface of ZIF-8 via 
in situ reduction using NaBH4 [26]. Specifically, 150 mg of ZIF-8 
nanoparticles and 25, 50 or 100 mg (7.5, 15, 30 mM) of AgNO3 were 
dispersed in 20 mL of methanol. This suspension was stirred in dark for 
12 h at room temperature to facilitate complete adsorption of silver ions 
onto the ZIF-8 framework. Afterward, the product was collected by 
centrifugation at 8000 rpm for 15 min at room temperature and washed 
three times with deionized water to remove unabsorbed silver ions from 
the system, thereby ensuring the uniformity and stability of the in-situ 
synthesized silver nanoparticles. The silver nitrate-loaded ZIF-8 was 
then redispersed in deionized water, and an aqueous solution of NaBH4 
(10 mg/mL) was added dropwise. The mixture was stirred continuously 
in dark for 30 min at room temperature. The final Ag-loaded ZIF-8 
(denoted as AgZ) was recovered by centrifugation at 8000 rpm for 15 
min, washed three times with both water and ethanol, and dried over­
night at 80 ◦C.
For the synthesis of silver nanoparticles without ZIF-8 as a host 
matrix, 250 mg of AgNO3 was dissolved in 17 mL of deionized water. 
Subsequently, an aqueous NaBH4 aqueous solution (10 mg/mL) was 
added dropwise under stirring. The reaction mixture was stirred 
continuously in dark for 30 min at room temperature. The resulting 
silver nanoparticles were collected by centrifugation at 8000 rpm for 15 
min, washed three times with water and three times with ethanol, and 
dried overnight at 80 ◦C.
4.3. Preparation of AgZ/GelSF coating
Silk fibroin (SF) was extracted following a previously reported 
method with modifications [84]. Briefly, 10 g of NaHCO3 powder was 
dissolved in 2 L of deionized water and heated to boiling. Then, 10 g of 
silkworm cocoons were immersed in the boiling solution to remove 
sericin proteins from the silk surface. After boiling for 1 h, the degum­
med silk fibers were collected, thoroughly rinsed with deionized water 
to remove residual sericin, and dried in an oven at 40 ◦C. Next, 80.77 g of 
LiBr was dissolved in deionized water and the volume adjusted to 100 
mL to prepare a 9.3 M LiBr solution. Subsequently, 8 g of the dried 
degummed silk was dissolved in the LiBr solution under continuous 
stirring and incubated at 40 ◦C in a water bath for 3 h to ensure complete 
dissolution. The resulting SF solution was transferred into a dialysis tube 
(8000 - 14,000 Da) and dialyzed against deionized water for 3 days, with 
the water changed three times daily. After dialysis, the solution was 
centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 15 min at room temperature to remove 
impurities, and the supernatant was collected. The purified SF solution 
was then placed in a dialysis tube (4500 Da) and concentrated by reverse 
dialysis against a 10% (w/v) polyethylene glycol (PEG) solution to 
remove excess water until the final SF concentration reached approxi­
mately 50 mg/mL.
For preparation of AgZ/GelSF coatings, AgZ nanoparticles were first 
dispersed uniformly in deionized water via ultrasonication to prepare a 
10 mg/mL suspension. This AgZ dispersion was mixed with SF solution 
(50 mg/mL) and GelMA solution (50 mg/mL) at specified ratios. The 
mixture was homogenized and drop-cast onto titanium discs (10 mm 
diameter, 1 mm thickness) or Ti-6Al-4V cages. The coatings were dried 
at 37 ◦C to form the final AgZ/GelSF composite coatings.
4.4. Characterizations
The morphology and surface elemental composition of AgZ nano­
particles were characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, 
G-120, Hitachi, Japan). The hydrodynamic particle size and zeta po­
tential of the nanoparticles dispersed in deionized water were measured 
using dynamic light scattering (DLS, Malvern ZetaSizer ZS2000, UK). 
K. Quan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Bioactive Materials 61 (2026) 712–729 
724 

Their crystal structure and chemical composition were analyzed by X- 
ray diffraction (XRD, PANalytical, The Netherlands) and Fourier- 
transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR, Nicolet-20DXB, USA), respec­
tively. Elemental content was quantified via inductively coupled 
plasma-mass spectrometry ((ICP-MS; Agilent 7500a, Hewlett-Packard, 
Yokogawa Analytical Systems, Tokyo, Japan) analysis after dissolving 
the nanoparticles in nitric acid.
The hydrophilicity of the AgZ/GelSF coatings was assessed by water 
contact angle measurements (Dataphysics OCA20, Germany). Surface 
morphology was directly observed through scanning electron micro­
scopy (SEM, S-4700, Hitachi, Japan). Elemental composition of the 
coatings was analyzed using energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX, 
S-4700, Hitachi, Japan) in SEM area-scan mode. Surface roughness was 
examined with atomic force microscopy (AFM, Bruker Dimension ICON, 
Germany). The adhesion strength between the coating and substrate was 
evaluated by scratch testing using a nano/micro-indenter (NHT3, Anton 
Paar, Austria).
4.5. Composition and degradation rate of GelSF coatings
The degradation behavior of GelSF coatings was initially assessed 
using a weight loss method. A 100 μL aliquot of a 50 mg/mL GelSF so­
lution with GelMA-to-SF mass ratios of 100:0, 75:25, 50:50, 25:75, and 
0:100, was drop-cast onto Ti discs and dried at 37 ◦C. The coated sam­
ples were subsequently immersed in PBS (pH 7.4) or in TSB at 37 ◦C for 
1, 4, 7, 14, and 28 days, respectively, followed by drying. The initial 
weight (W1) and post-immersion weight (W2) of each sample were 
recorded. The percentage of weight loss was calculated using the 
formula: 
Weight loss(%) = (W1 −W2 mg) / 5 mg × 100%
(1) 
Additionally, fluorescence-based degradation was evaluated. A 100 
μL portion of the 100 mg/mL GelSF solution at GelMA-to-SF ratios of 
100:0, 50:50 and 0:100, containing SYTO9 dye (1 μL per mL GelSF) was 
applied onto Ti discs and dried in the dark at 37 ◦C. These samples were 
immersed in PBS (pH 7.4) in the dark at 37 ◦C for the same time points 
(1, 4, 7, 14, and 28 days). After drying, fluorescence intensity of the 
coatings was observed under a fluorescence microscope. Quantification 
was performed using ImageJ software, and fluorescence reduction was 
calculated as: 
Reduced intensity (%) = (I0 −In) / I0 × 100%
(2) 
where I0 is the fluorescence intensity before immersion, and In is the 
intensity after n days of immersion.
Finally, elemental analysis was conducted on GelSF coatings with a 
GelMA-to-SF mass ratio of 50:50. These coatings were applied onto Ti- 
6Al-4V cages at a loading of 55 mg per cage and dried at 37 ◦C. Sam­
ples were immersed in PBS (pH 7.4) at 37 ◦C for the same time intervals 
(1, 4, 7, 14, and 28 days) and then dried. The coating surfaces were 
examined via SEM and exposed titanium on the sample surfaces was 
analyzed by EDX mapping. Elemental content (E) was quantified using 
ImageJ software, and the percentage of exposed titanium was calculated 
using: 
Exposured Ti (%) = En / E × 100%
(3) 
where E represents the titanium content on the surface of an uncoated 
Ti-6Al-4V cage, and En is the titanium content on the surface of a GelSF- 
coated cage after n days of immersion.
4.6. In vitro cytotoxicity and osteogenic performance evaluation on AgZ/ 
GelSF coatings
Mouse embryonic osteoblast precursor cells (MC3T3-E1) were 
cultured in α-minimal essential medium (α-MEM; Gibco, Grand Island, 
NY, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Hyclone, 
USA) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (100 U/mL penicillin and 100 mg/ 
mL streptomycin) at 37 ◦C under a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere. 
When cells reached approximately 90% confluence, they were detached 
using 0.25% trypsin/EDTA and resuspended in fresh culture medium. 
For subsequent experiments, sample extracts were prepared by incu­
bating each test material in α-MEM for 24 h at an extraction ratio of 1.25 
cm2/mL for Ti disc and 0.2 g/mL for Ti-6Al-4V cages, respectively.
Cell viability was assessed using a CCK-8 assay kit (HY-K0301, 
MedChemExpress, USA). MC3T3-E1 cells were seeded at 5000 cells per 
well in 96-well plates and cultured for 24 h. The culture medium was 
then replaced with the prepared sample extracts. After an additional 24- 
h incubation, the extracts were removed, and cells were treated with 
10% CCK-8 reagent for 1.5 h. Absorbance was measured at 450 nm to 
quantify cell viability according to 
Viability (%) =
(
Asample −Anegative
) / (
Apositive −Anegative
)
× 100%
(4) 
where A represents the absorbance value.
Cytotoxicity was further evaluated using a calcein/propidium iodide 
(PI) double-staining kit (C2015M, Beyotime Biotechnology, China). 
Cells were cultured under the same conditions described above, stained 
according to the manufacturer's protocol, and imaged using a fluores­
cence microscope (BX-51, Olympus, Japan) with excitation wavelengths 
of 494 nm and 535 nm.
For morphological analysis, MC3T3-E1 cells were fixed with 4% (w/ 
v) paraformaldehyde and permeabilized with 0.5% (v/v) Triton X-100, 
each for 10 min. Actin filaments and nuclei were stained with FITC- 
phalloidin (1.0%, P5282, Solarbio, China) and DAPI (1 mg/mL, Solar­
bio, China), respectively, at room temperature. Images were captured 
using confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) at excitation wave­
lengths of 488 nm and 405 nm.
Cells were seeded in 6-well plates at a density of 350,000 cells per 
well. After reaching confluence, a scratch wound was made using a 
sterile pipette tip. Cell migration into the wound area was monitored at 
12 and 24 h using an optical microscope (BX-51, Olympus, Japan) while 
cells were cultured in sample extracts.
After 7 days of culture, alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was 
detected using a BCIP/NBT ALP color development kit (C3206, Beyo­
time Biotechnology, China). Images were obtained under an optical 
microscope, and quantitative analysis was performed using ImageJ 
software.
Extracellular matrix mineralization was assessed after 14 days of 
culture by staining with Alizarin Red S (ARS; G1452, Solarbio, China). 
Stained mineralized nodules were imaged with an optical microscope. 
For quantification, the bound dye was solubilized in 10% cetylpyr­
idinium chloride (Aladdin, China), and absorbance was measured at 
570 nm using a microplate reader.
4.7. In vivo osteogenic performance of AgZ/GelSF coating in a rabbit 
femoral condylar defect model
Six adult male New Zealand white rabbits (25 weeks old, weighing 
3.0 ± 0.5 kg) were randomly divided into two groups. A femoral 
condylar defect model was surgically established in each rabbit. All 
surgical procedures were conducted under general anesthesia using 
pentobarbital sodium (30 mg/kg). The left forelimb of each rabbit was 
immobilized, shaved, and depilated. The surgical site was identified by 
palpating the slightly elevated platform structure located approximately 
1 cm above the lateral side of the knee joint. A longitudinal incision, 
approximately 2.5 cm in length, was made along the joint's long axis, 
centered over the lateral femoral condyle. Following incision, the skin, 
subcutaneous tissue, muscle, and periosteum were sequentially 
dissected. Muscle tissue was retracted, and the patella was displaced 
medially to fully expose the lateral femoral condyle. Once the center of 
the intended bone defect was confirmed to be 0.5–1.0 cm proximal to 
the distal end of the femur, a cylindrical bone defect was created using 
K. Quan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Bioactive Materials 61 (2026) 712–729 
725 

an orthopedic electric drill. The defect was drilled perpendicular to the 
long axis of the diaphysis and parallel to the coronal plane, with a 
diameter of 6 mm and a depth of 9 mm. After implantation of Ti-6Al-4V 
rod (Φ 6 mm × 9 mm, with or without AgZ/GelSF Coating), the surgical 
site was closed in layers. On postoperative week 6, all animals were 
euthanized via intravenous injection of potassium chloride (2 mmol/kg) 
following deep anesthesia. The femurs were harvested for micro- 
computed tomography (micro-CT) analysis to assess bone healing and 
new bone formation between the two groups. Each femur was fixed in 
4% paraformaldehyde 24 h prior to scanning. Micro-CT was performed 
using a high-resolution scanner (Siemens, Munich, Germany) with the 
following parameters: voltage 60 kVp, current 220 μA, exposure time 
1500 ms, 360◦rotation, and an effective pixel size of 8.82 μm. Data were 
analyzed using multimodal visualization software (Inveon Research 
Workplace, Siemens, Germany). Hard tissue sections were prepared as 
follows: femoral samples underwent gradient dehydration, followed by 
embedding in polymethyl methacrylate resin. Sections were cut using an 
EXAKT 300CP saw microtome and subsequently stained with methylene 
blue–acid magenta.
4.8. In vitro antibacterial performance and mechanism research of AgZ/ 
GelSF coating
Two bacterial strains, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
ATCC 43300 (MRSA) and Escherichia coli ATCC 25922 (E. coli), were 
used in this study. A single colony of each strain was inoculated into 5 
mL of Tryptic Soy Broth (TSB) and cultured at 37 ◦C with shaking at 190 
rpm for 16 h. Bacterial cells were harvested by centrifugation at 5000×g 
for 5 min, washed twice with sterile PBS (pH 7.4), and resuspended in 
PBS. The bacterial suspension concentration was determined by 
measuring absorbance at 650 nm using a UV spectrophotometer (Shi­
madzu, Japan) and calculated based on a pre-established calibration 
curve [85].
To detect the Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) and mini­
mum bactericidal concentration (MBC) of nanoparticles, bacterial 
strains were cultured as described above. A 100 μL aliquot of nano­
particle suspension in TSB was added to a 96-well plate, each containing 
100 μL of TSB per well. The mixture was serially diluted in 2-fold in­
crements, followed by the addition of 10 μL of bacterial suspension (105 
CFU/mL) to each well. The plates were incubated for 24 h at 37 ◦C. MIC 
was defined as the lowest concentration of the antimicrobial agent that 
completely inhibited visible bacterial growth. MBC was subsequently 
determined by plating aliquots from wells showing no visible growth 
onto LB agar plates; after incubation at 37 ◦C for 24 h, the lowest con­
centration that yielded no colony formation was recorded as the MBC.
Ti-6Al-4V cages coated with 55 mg of AgZ/GelSF (AgZ loading: 0.25 
mg per 5 mg GelSF; GelMA-to-SF mass ratio = 50:50) were immersed in 
PBS (pH 7.4) or in TSB at 37 ◦C for 0, 1, 4, 7, 14, and 28 days. After each 
immersion period, the solutions were collected, and silver ion concen­
tration was measured by ICP-MS to determine the release amount and 
rate of AgZ. The cages were then incubated with bacterial suspensions 
(106 CFU/mL) at 37 ◦C for 24 h. Adherent bacteria were detached via 
ultrasonication, and bacterial viability was quantified through colony- 
forming unit (CFU) enumeration. For direct visualization of bacterial 
viability, AgZ/GelSF-coated titanium discs were subjected to the same 
immersion and bacterial incubation conditions, then stained with 
SYTO9 and propidium iodide (PI) for live/dead fluorescence imaging. 
To observe bacterial morphology, cages exposed to bacterial suspen­
sions were fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde, dehydrated through a 
graded ethanol series (50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 90%, and 100% v/v, 
respectively), sputter-coated with gold, and examined using SEM. Un­
coated Ti-6Al-4V cages or Ti discs were served as controls.
Transcriptome RNA sequencing was performed by OE Biotech Co., 
Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Total RNA was extracted using TRIzol reagent 
(Invitrogen, USA), and sequencing libraries were prepared with the 
VAHTS Universal V6 RNA-seq Library Prep Kit following the 
manufacturer's instructions. Sequencing was conducted on an Illumina 
NovaSeq 6000 platform. The 150 bp paired-end reads were aligned to 
the reference genome using HISAT2. Differential gene expression anal­
ysis was performed with DESeq2, applying a significance threshold of Q 
value < 0.05 and |fold change| > 2. Hierarchical clustering of differ­
entially expressed genes (DEGs) was carried out using R (v3.2.0) to 
visualize expression patterns across groups and samples. A radar chart 
depicting the top 20 DEGs was generated using the R package “grader” 
to illustrate up- and down-regulated genes. Functional enrichment an­
alyses, including GO, KEGG, Reactome, and WikiPathways, were con­
ducted using hypergeometric distribution tests in R (v3.2.0) to identify 
significantly enriched terms, visualized as bar plots, A4 plots, and 
bubble diagrams. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) was performed 
using dedicated GSEA software.
4.9. In vivo biological performance of AgZ/GelSF coating in a porcine 
transoral atlantoaxial spine implantation model
Fifteen healthy male Guangxi Bama minipigs (45 ± 5 kg, 3 months of 
age) were randomly divided into five groups (n = 3 per group). Each 
group received implants in the atlantoaxial (C1–C2) joint as follows: 
Group 1: MRSA-contaminated Ti-6Al-4V cage, sacrificed at 4 weeks. 
Group 2: MRSA-contaminated AgZ/GelSF-coated Ti-6Al-4V cage, 
sacrificed at 4 weeks; Group 3: Pristine Ti-6Al-4V cage, sacrificed at 12 
weeks. Group 4: MRSA-contaminated Ti-6Al-4V cage, sacrificed at 12 
weeks. Group 5: MRSA-contaminated AgZ/GelSF-coated Ti-6Al-4V 
cage, sacrificed at 12 weeks. For MRSA contamination, cages (with or 
without coating) were immersed in a bacterial suspension (106 CFU/mL) 
24 h prior to implantation.
General anesthesia was induced with an intramuscular combination 
of xylazine hydrochloride (6 mg/kg) and Zoletil 50 (6 mg/kg). 
Following successful induction, endotracheal intubation was performed, 
and anesthesia was maintained with isoflurane (2.2–2.5%) using a tidal 
volume of 10 mL/kg. Animals were positioned supine, with torso and 
limbs securely fixed to the surgical table using elastic bandages. The 
head was stabilized in a hyperextended position. Under fluoroscopic 
guidance with a C-arm X-ray system, the C1 and C2 vertebrae were 
localized (see Fig. S12). A midline longitudinal incision approximately 
12 cm in length was made over the cervical region. The skin, subcu­
taneous tissue, and cutaneous colli muscle were incised sequentially. 
The surgical approach proceeded medial to the sternocephalicus muscle, 
followed by blunt dissection through the intermuscular space. The 
vascular sheath esophagus, and trachea were gently retracted to expose 
the anterior surface of the C2 vertebra. Anterior ligamentous and 
muscular structures were released, followed by release of the peri- 
odontoid soft tissue. Dissection extended laterally to expose the right 
lateral mass joint. Two Caspar pins were inserted parallel to the joint 
surface on either side of the joint. A distractor was mounted onto these 
pins to open the joint space. The articular cartilage was carefully 
removed using a reamer and curette to expose the subchondral bone. A 
cage of appropriate size was implanted into the lateral mass joint space, 
after which the distractor was released. A suitable 4-hole titanium plate 
was positioned anterior to the lateral mass joint and fixed with two 
screws each into the lateral mass of C1 and C2. The position of the in­
ternal fixation and the cage was confirmed by fluoroscopy. The surgical 
site was thoroughly irrigated with saline, and the incision was closed in 
layers, followed by sterile wound dressing.
After respective feeding periods of 4 or 12 weeks, animals were 
euthanized under deep anesthesia for further analyses. For antibacterial 
evaluation, implants and surrounding peri-implant tissues from Groups 
1 and 2 were harvested. Antibacterial efficacy was quantitatively 
assessed by counting colony-forming units (CFUs) on agar plates and 
qualitatively evaluated by histological staining of the peri-implant tis­
sues. For osteogenic performance evaluation, basilar part of the occipital 
bone - C2 vertebral segments from Groups 3, 4, and 5 were harvested 
and immediately stored at −20 ◦C. All soft tissue, including the ligament 
K. Quan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Bioactive Materials 61 (2026) 712–729 
726 

complexes, joint capsules, and intervertebral discs, were preserved and 
showed no disruption. Then the range of motion (ROM) of the fixed 
segments was measured using a mechanical testing system [51–53]. 
Before biomechanical testing, the specimens were thawed overnight at 
room temperature. Throughout the potting procedure, the cervical spine 
was carefully maintained in a neutral position while both ends of each 
specimen were embedded in polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) and 
mounted onto a spine motion simulator (MTS Corporation, Eden Prairie, 
MN, USA). Pilot markers were affixed to the anterior aspects of the C1 
right lateral mass and the C2 vertebral body to quantify intersegmental 
range of motion (ROM), which was measured and analyzed using a 
three-dimensional motion capture system (Optotrak Certus, Northern 
Digital Inc., Ontario, Canada). Subsequently, the specimens were fixed 
in 4% paraformaldehyde for one week. Bone-implant constructs were 
firstly scanned using a high-resolution micro-CT system (Siemens, 
Munich, Germany) to assess bone ingrowth and osseointegration around 
the cages. Finally, samples were embedded, sectioned into hard tissue 
slices, and stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) as well as 
methylene-blue/acid fuchsin for microscopic evaluation of bone for­
mation and remodeling. For biosafety assessment, major visceral organs 
(heart, liver, spleen, lungs, and kidneys) and blood samples were 
collected from Groups 3, 4, and 5. Organ tissues were sectioned and 
stained with H&E to identify any pathological changes. Routine blood 
tests and biochemical analyses were performed to evaluate systemic 
toxicity. Silver ions content in blood or in organs was measured by 
ICP-MS.
4.10. Statistical analysis
Data was expressed as mean ± standard deviation (SD). One-way 
analysis of variance (ANOVA) with student's t-test was performed for 
statistical significance among groups. *p < 0.05 was considered to be 
statistical significance.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Kecheng Quan: Writing – original draft, Validation, Methodology, 
Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, 
Conceptualization. Ting Zhang: Methodology, Investigation. Xingyu 
Zhou: Methodology, Investigation. Shanshan Liu: Methodology, 
Investigation. Zhinan Mao: Investigation. Jiang Sun: Methodology, 
Investigation. Shilin Xue: Investigation. Xingchen Yao: Investigation. 
Yinglun Tian: Investigation. Cheng Zhang: Investigation. Jian He: 
Investigation. Dingbang Xie: Investigation. Weishi Li: Resources, 
Funding acquisition. Shenglin Wang: Resources, Funding acquisition. 
Yufeng Zheng: Writing – review & editing. Nanfang Xu: Writing – 
review & editing, Supervision, Resources, Project administration, 
Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
The animal surgical procedures were conducted in accordance with 
the Guidelines for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and approved by 
Peking University Third Clinical Medical School Ethical Committee of 
Animals (approval number: A2024072) and the Experimental Animal 
Management Committee of Shanghai Chengxi Biotechnology Co., Ltd 
(approval number: CX052403054).
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare the following financial interests/personal re­
lationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: 
Prof. Yufeng Zheng is an editor-in-chief for Bioactive Materials and was 
not involved in the editorial review or the decision to publish this article. 
Other authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgement
This research was supported by the National Natural Science Foun­
dation of China (52201293) and Peking University Third Hospital 
Clinical Key Project - Talent Program Category A (BYSYZD2025032).
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2026.02.035.
References
[1] D.B.G. Tai, R. Patel, F. Lovecchio, T. Kwee, M. Wouthuyzen-Bakker, State-of-the- 
Art review: diagnosis and management of spinal implant infections, Clin. Infect. 
Dis. 79 (2024) e65–e71, https://doi.org/10.1093/cid/ciae436.
[2] X. He, Y. Li, D. Zou, H. Zu, W. Li, Y. Zheng, An overview of magnesium-based 
implants in orthopaedics and a prospect of its application in spine fusion, Bioact. 
Mater. 39 (2024) 456–478, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2024.04.026.
[3] S.M. Kurtz, J.N. Devine, PEEK biomaterials in trauma, orthopedic, and spinal 
implants, Biomaterials 28 (2007) 4845–4869, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biomaterials.2007.07.013.
[4] E.A. Masters, B.F. Ricciardi, K.L.d.M. Bentley, T.F. Moriarty, E.M. Schwarz, 
G. Muthukrishnan, Skeletal infections: microbial pathogenesis, immunity and 
clinical management, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 20 (2022) 385–400, https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41579-022-00686-0.
[5] Z. Wu, B. Chan, J. Low, J.J.H. Chu, H.W.D. Hey, A. Tay, Microbial resistance to 
nanotechnologies: an important but understudied consideration using 
antimicrobial nanotechnologies in orthopaedic implants, Bioact. Mater. 16 (2022) 
249–270, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2022.02.014.
[6] J. Yi, Z. Chen, R. Li, Z. Xu, Y. Song, Q. Fan, J. Wang, W. Chai, Orthopedic implant 
infection management: prevention, barrier breakthrough, and immunomodulation, 
ACS Nano 19 (2025) 27009–27032, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.4c17509.
[7] M. Kazemzadeh-Narbat, A. Memic, K.B. McGowan, A. Memic, A. Tamayol, 
Advances in antimicrobial orthopaedic devices and FDA regulatory challenges, 
Prog. Biomed. Eng. 6 (2024) 032002, https://doi.org/10.1088/2516-1091/ 
ad5cb1.
[8] E. Yusuf, W. Bramer, A.A. Anas, Clinical outcomes of rifampicin combination 
therapy in implant-associated infections due to staphylococci and streptococci: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis, Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents 63 (2024) 107015, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijantimicag.2023.107015.
[9] H.C. Flemming, E.D. van Hullebusch, B.J. Little, T.R. Neu, P.H. Nielsen, T. Seviour, 
P. Stoodley, J. Wingender, S. Wuertz, Microbial extracellular polymeric substances 
in the environment, technology and medicine, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 23 (2024) 
87–105, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579-024-01098-y.
[10] H.C. Flemming, E.D. van Hullebusch, T.R. Neu, P.H. Nielsen, T. Seviour, 
P. Stoodley, J. Wingender, S. Wuertz, The biofilm matrix: multitasking in a shared 
space, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 21 (2023) 70–86, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41579- 
022-00791-0.
[11] M. Macki, A. Basheer, I. Lee, R. Kather, I. Rubinfeld, M.M. Abdulhak, Surgical site 
infection after transoral versus posterior approach for atlantoaxial fusion: a 
matched-cohort study, J. Neurosurg. Spine 28 (2012) 33–39, https://doi.org/ 
10.3171/2017.5.SPINE161064.
[12] N. Xu, Y. Tian, H. Zhao, H. Chu, F. Li, B. Wang, P. Liu, F. Yin, L. Li, L. Wang, 
Y. Zhang, L. Chen, L. Chen, J. Zhu, Z. Tian, C. Li, F. Wang, S. Xue, C. Zhang, W. Li, 
S. Wang, Revisiting the treatment algorithm for atlantoaxial dislocation after 10 
years: a multi-center study with mid-to-long-term Follow-up, Spine (Phila. Pa. 
1976) 50 (2025) 1420–1426, https://doi.org/10.1097/BRS.0000000000005318.
[13] Y. Zhang, S.C. Fu, Y. Wu, C.S. Zhou, X.Y. Ma, Research on pharyngeal bacterial 
flora in transoral atlantoaxial operation and the postoperative follow-up study, 
BMC Muscoskelet. Disord. 23 (2022) 922, https://doi.org/10.1186/s12891-022- 
05851-3.
[14] B.H. Kapadia, R.A. Berg, J.A. Daley, J. Fritz, A. Bhave, M.A. Mont, Periprosthetic 
joint infection, Lancet 387 (2016) 386–394, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736 
(14)61798-0.
[15] H. Chen, C. Zhu, H. Yi, H. Sun, X. Ma, J. Wang, K. Zhang, F. Ai, Z. Wu, Q. Yin, 
Q. Tu, H. Xia, Incidence and management of surgical site infection in the cervical 
spine following a transoral approach, Int. Orthop. 46 (2022) 2329–2337, https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s00264-022-05492-0.
[16] T. Zhang, Q. Liu, F. Meng, Y. Hou, M.K.H. Leung, Y. Wen, Q. Zhang, Recent 
advances in stimuli-responsive antibacterial coatings: Bacteria-killing and releasing 
mechanism, design strategies, and potential applications, Prog. Org. Coating 186 
(2024) 107923, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.porgcoat.2023.107923.
[17] Y. Hsu, Y. He, X. Zhao, F. Wang, F. Yang, Y. Zheng, Y. Zhou, D. Xia, Y. Liu, 
Photothermal coating on zinc alloy for controlled biodegradation and improved 
osseointegration, Adv. Sci. 12 (2025) 2409051, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
advs.202409051.
[18] T. Wei, Q. Yu, H. Chen, Responsive and synergistic antibacterial coatings: fighting 
against bacteria in a smart and effective way, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 8 (2019) 
1801381, https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.201801381.
K. Quan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Bioactive Materials 61 (2026) 712–729 
727 

[19] D. Keskin, G. Zu, A.M. Forson, L. Tromp, J. Sjollema, P. van Rijn, Nanogels: a novel 
approach in antimicrobial delivery systems and antimicrobial coatings, Bioact. 
Mater. 6 (2021) 3634–3657, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bioactmat.2021.03.004.
[20] S. Akshaya, P.K. Rowlo, A. Dukle, A.J. Nathanael, Antibacterial coatings for 
titanium implants: recent trends and future perspectives, Antibiotics 11 (2022) 
1719, https://doi.org/10.3390/antibiotics11121719.
[21] D. Aggarwal, V. Kumar, S. Sharma, Drug-loaded biomaterials for orthopedic 
applications: a review, J. Contr. Release 344 (2022) 113–133, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jconrel.2022.02.029.
[22] X. Gong, N.D. Jadhav, V.V. Lonikar, A.N. Kulkarni, H. Zhang, B.R. Sankapal, 
J. Ren, B. Bin Xu, H.M. Pathan, Y. Ma, Z. Lin, E. Witherspoon, Z. Wang, Z. Guo, An 
overview of green synthesized silver nanoparticles towards bioactive antibacterial, 
antimicrobial and antifungal applications, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 323 (2024) 
103053, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cis.2023.103053.
[23] C. Liao, Y. Li, S.C. Tjong, Bactericidal and cytotoxic properties of silver 
nanoparticles, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 20 (2019) 449, https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
ijms20020449.
[24] A.M. El Badawy, T.P. Luxton, R.G. Silva, K.G. Scheckel, M.T. Suidan, T. 
M. Tolaymat, Impact of environmental conditions (pH, ionic strength, and 
electrolyte type) on the surface charge and aggregation of silver nanoparticles 
suspensions, Environ. Sci. Technol. 44 (2010) 1260–1266, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/es902240k.
[25] Y.F. Guo, W.J. Fang, J.R. Fu, Y. Wu, J. Zheng, G.Q. Gao, C. Chen, R.W. Yan, S. 
G. Huang, C.C. Wang, Facile synthesis of Ag@ZIF-8 core-shell heterostructure 
nanowires for improved antibacterial activities, Appl. Surf. Sci. 435 (2018) 
149–155, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2017.11.096.
[26] C. Yu, Y. Yu, Y. Lu, K. Quan, Z. Mao, Y. Zheng, L. Qin, D. Xia, UiO-66/AgNPs 
coating for dental implants in preventing bacterial infections, J. Dent. Res. 103 
(2024) 516–525, https://doi.org/10.1177/00220345241229646.
[27] F. Ahmadijokani, H. Molavi, M. Rezakazemi, S. Tajahmadi, A. Bahi, F. Ko, T. 
M. Aminabhavi, J.R. Li, M. Arjmand, UiO-66 metal–organic frameworks in water 
treatment: a critical review, Prog. Mater. Sci. 125 (2022) 100904, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.pmatsci.2021.100904.
[28] K. Quan, Z. Mao, Y. Lu, Y. Qin, S. Wang, C. Yu, X. Bi, H. Tang, X. Ren, D. Chen, 
Y. Cheng, Y. Wang, Y. Zheng, D. Xia, Composited silk fibroins ensured adhesion 
stability and magnetic controllability of Fe3O4-nanoparticle coating on implant for 
biofilm treatment, Mater. Horiz. 11 (2024) 3157–3165, https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
d4mh00097h.
[29] D. Han, X. Liu, S. Wu, Metal organic framework-based antibacterial agents and 
their underlying mechanisms, Chem. Soc. Rev. 51 (2022) 7138–7169, https://doi. 
org/10.1039/d2cs00460g.
[30] H. Tang, Y. Yu, X. Zhan, Y. Chai, Y. Zheng, Y. Liu, D. Xia, H. Lin, Zeolite 
imidazolate framework-8 in bone regeneration: a systematic review, J. Contr. 
Release 365 (2024) 558–582, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jconrel.2023.11.049.
[31] K. Quan, Y. Lu, T. Zhang, S. Wang, H. Tang, C. Yu, Y. Zhou, Y. Liu, D. Xia, Y. Zheng, 
Magnetically-drivable, pH-responsive Fe3O4/ZIF-8 coating on implant for biofilm 
prevention and treatment, Nano Today 64 (2025) 102772, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.nantod.2025.102772.
[32] K. Yue, G. Trujillo-de Santiago, M.M. Alvarez, A. Tamayol, N. Annabi, 
A. Khademhosseini, Synthesis, properties, and biomedical applications of gelatin 
methacryloyl (GelMA) hydrogels, Biomaterials 73 (2015) 254–271, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.08.045.
[33] S. Ghalei, M. Douglass, H. Handa, Nitric oxide-releasing gelatin methacryloyl/silk 
fibroin interpenetrating polymer network hydrogels for tissue engineering 
applications, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 8 (2022) 273–283, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acsbiomaterials.1c01121.
[34] N. Zheng, V. Fitzpatrick, R. Cheng, R. Cheng, D.L. Kaplan, Photoacoustic carbon 
nanotubes embedded silk scaffolds for neural stimulation and regeneration, ACS 
Nano 16 (2022) 2292–2305, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.1c08491.
[35] J.K. Sahoo, O. Hasturk, T. Falcucci, D.L. Kaplan, Silk chemistry and biomedical 
material designs, Nat. Rev. Chem 7 (2023) 302–318, https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41570-023-00486-x.
[36] T. Zhang, Y. Yu, W. Yuan, Z. Ren, Y. Cheng, S. Wu, Y. Zheng, D. Xia, 
Photothermally controlled ICG@ZIF-8/PLGA coating to modify the degradation 
behavior and biocompatibility of Zn-Li alloy for bone implants, Regen. Biomater. 
12 (2025), https://doi.org/10.1093/rb/rbaf001 rbaf001.
[37] J. Shi, L. Zhang, N. Sun, D. Hu, Q. Shen, F. Mao, Q. Gao, W. Wei, Facile and rapid 
preparation of Ag@ZIF-8 for carboxylation of terminal alkynes with CO2 in mild 
conditions, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 11 (2019) 28858–28867, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acsami.9b07991.
[38] X. Li, K. Xu, Y. He, B. Tao, K. Li, C. Lin, J. Hu, J. Wu, Y. Wu, S. Liu, Peng liu, 
H. Wang, K. Cai, ROS-responsive hydrogel coating modified titanium promotes 
vascularization and osteointegration of bone defects by orchestrating 
immunomodulation, Biomaterials 287 (2022) 121683, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biomaterials.2022.121683.
[39] Y. Wang, D.D. Rudym, A. Walsh, L. Abrahamsen, H.J. Kim, H.S. Kim, C. Kirker- 
Head, D.L. Kaplan, In vivo degradation of three-dimensional silk fibroin scaffolds, 
Biomaterials 29 (2008) 3415–3428, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biomaterials.2008.05.002.
[40] A. Mazare, W.H. Goldmann, E. Kocak, B. Osuagwu, S. Qin, R. Cao, P. Schmuki, 
Silver-loaded titania-based metal–organic frameworks as a platform for silver ion 
release for antibacterial applications, Nano Lett. 25 (2025) 12547–12553, https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/acs.nanolett.5c02681.
[41] L. Tan, G. Yuan, P. Wang, S. Feng, Y. Tong, C. Wang, pH-responsive Ag-Phy@ZIF-8 
nanoparticles modified by hyaluronate for efficient synergistic bacteria 
disinfection, Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 206 (2022) 605–613, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2022.02.097.
[42] M. Askarizadeh, N. Esfandiari, B. Honarvar, S.A. Sajadian, A. Azdarpour, Kinetic 
modeling to explain the release of medicine from drug delivery systems, 
ChemBioEng Rev. 10 (2023) 1006–1049, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
cben.202300027.
[43] H. Lin, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang, Unlocking the intercalation mechanism of blue 
phosphorene/MBene heterostructures for lithium/sodium-ion batteries: a first 
principles study, J. Mol. Liq. 409 (2024) 125528, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
molliq.2024.125528.
[44] N. Singh, K.M. Paknikar, J. Rajwade, RNA-sequencing reveals a multitude of effects 
of silver nanoparticles on Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms, Environ. Sci. Nano 6 
(2019) 1812–1828, https://doi.org/10.1039/c8en01286e.
[45] A. Singh, K. Rani, V. Tandon, A.K. Sahoo, S.K. Samanta, Ag NCs as a potent 
antibiofilm agent against pathogenic Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Acinetobacter 
baumannii and drug-resistant Bacillus subtilis by affecting chemotaxis and flagellar 
assembly pathway genes, Biomater. Sci. 10 (2022) 6778–6790, https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/d2bm01399a.
[46] M. de Celis, I. Belda, D. Marquina, A. Santos, Phenotypic and transcriptional study 
of the antimicrobial activity of silver and zinc oxide nanoparticles on a wastewater 
biofilm-forming Pseudomonas aeruginosa strain, Sci. Total Environ. 826 (2022) 
153915, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.153915.
[47] N. Singh, J. Rajwade, K.M. Paknikar, Transcriptome analysis of silver nanoparticles 
treated Staphylococcus aureus reveals potential targets for biofilm inhibition, 
Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 175 (2019) 487–497, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
colsurfb.2018.12.032.
[48] A. Masri, N.A. Khan, M.Z.H.M. Zoqratt, Q. Ayub, A. Anwar, K. Rao, M.R. Shah, 
R. Siddiqui, Transcriptome analysis of Escherichia coli K1 after therapy with 
hesperidin conjugated with silver nanoparticles, BMC Microbiol. 21 (2021) 51, 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12866-021-02097-2.
[49] X. Hu, D. Li, H. Li, Y. Piao, H. Wan, T. Zhou, M. Karimi, X. Zhao, Y. Li, L. Shi, Y. Liu, 
Reaction-induced self-assembly of polymyxin mitigates cytotoxicity and reverses 
drug resistance, Adv. Mater. 36 (2024) 2406156, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adma.202406156.
[50] B. Li, T.J. Webster, Bacteria antibiotic resistance: new challenges and opportunities 
for implant-associated orthopedic infections, J. Orthop. Res. 36 (2018) 22–32, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/jor.23656.
[51] Y. Tian, N. Xu, H. Leng, S. Wang, Spinous process screw fixation: a salvage 
technique in subaxial cervical spinal instrumentation, World Neurosurg. 154 
(2021) e458–e464, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wneu.2021.07.059.
[52] Y. Tian, N. Xu, H. Leng, K.L. Hung, X. Hou, J. Chen, M. Yan, W. Li, S. Wang, The 
range of motion characteristics of atlantoaxial joints with the “sandwich” 
deformity: a human cadaveric biomechanical study, Neurosurg. Rev. 48 (2025) 
236, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10143-025-03339-x.
[53] S. Wang, H. Leng, Y. Tian, N. Xu, Z. Liu, A novel 3D-printed locking cage for 
anterior atlantoaxial fixation and fusion: case report and in vitro biomechanical 
evaluation, BMC Muscoskelet. Disord. 22 (2021) 121, https://doi.org/10.1186/ 
s12891-021-03987-2.
[54] J. Dong, F. Chen, Y. Yao, C. Wu, S. Ye, Z. Ma, H. Yuan, D. Shao, L. Wang, Y. Wang, 
Bioactive mesoporous silica nanoparticle-functionalized titanium implants with 
controllable antimicrobial peptide release potentiate the regulation of 
inflammation and osseointegration, Biomaterials 305 (2024) 122465, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2023.122465.
[55] H.S. Choi, J. Yun, Y. Jeong, Y.K. Jo, H.J. Cha, Self-controllable proteinic 
antibacterial coating with bacteria-triggered antibiotic release for prevention of 
periprosthetic infection, Biomaterials 305 (2024) 122457, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.biomaterials.2023.122457.
[56] Y. Zhang, N. Sun, F. Hu, W. Zhang, Q. Gao, Q. Bai, C. Zheng, Q. Chen, Y. Han, T. Lu, 
Combined release of LL37 peptide and zinc ion from a mussel-inspired coating on 
porous titanium for infected bone defect repairing, Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 
244 (2024) 114181, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2024.114181.
[57] Z. Wang, X. Liu, G. Duan, L. Chen, L. Han, Z. Guo, D. Chang, C. Zhang, C. Liu, 
M. Ma, J. Sheng, T. Sun, J. Weng, Bioactive Cu/Zn-loaded micro/nano coatings on 
titanium promoting antibacterial effects, immune response, and bone integration, 
Chem. Eng. J. 520 (2025) 166238, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2025.166238.
[58] T.T. Nguyen, P. Zhang, J. Bi, N.H. Nguyen, Y. Dang, Z. Xu, H. Wang, N. Ninan, 
R. Bright, T. Pham, C.K. Nguyen, Y. Sabri, M.T. Nguyen, J. Vongsvivut, Y. Zhao, 
K. Vasilev, V.K. Truong, Silver─Gallium nano-amalgamated particles as a novel, 
biocompatible solution for antibacterial coatings, Adv. Funct. Mater. 34 (2024) 
2310539, https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202310539.
[59] M.F. Kunrath, G. Rubensam, F.V.F. Rodrigues, D.R. Marinowic, P. Sesterheim, S. 
D. de Oliveira, E.R. Teixeira, R. Hubler, Nano-scaled surfaces and sustainable- 
antibiotic-release from polymeric coating for application on intra-osseous implants 
and trans-mucosal abutments, Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 228 (2023) 113417, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2023.113417.
[60] E. Ozkan, L.M. Estes Bright, A. Kumar, R. Pandey, R. Devine, D. Francis, S. Ghalei, 
M. Ashcraft, P. Maffe, M. Brooks, A. Shome, M. Garren, H. Handa, Bioinspired 
superhydrophobic surfaces with silver and nitric oxide-releasing capabilities to 
prevent device-associated infections and thrombosis, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 664 
(2024) 928–937, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2024.03.082.
[61] J. Aveyard, S. Richards, M. Li, G. Pitt, G.L. Hughes, A. Akpan, R. Akhtar, A. Kazaili, 
R.A. D’Sa, Nitric oxide releasing coatings for the prevention of viral and bacterial 
infections, Biomater. Sci. 12 (2024) 4664–4681, https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
d4bm00172a.
[62] J. Andrade del Olmo, L. P´erez-´Alvarez, V. S´aez Martínez, S. Benito Cid, L. Ruiz- 
Rubio, R. P´erez Gonz´alez, J.L. Vilas-Vilela, J.M. Alonso, Multifunctional 
K. Quan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Bioactive Materials 61 (2026) 712–729 
728 

antibacterial chitosan-based hydrogel coatings on Ti6Al4V biomaterial for 
biomedical implant applications, Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 231 (2023) 123328, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2023.123328.
[63] ´A. Solís-Garrido, B. Toirac, J.J. Aguilera-Correa, A. Mediero, J. Esteban, 
A. Jim´enez-Morales, Prophylaxis of arthroplasty-related gram-negative infections: 
efficacy of Levofloxacin-loaded sol–gel coatings, J. Sol. Gel Sci. Technol. (2025), 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10971-025-06881-8.
[64] S. Dey, A.K. Singh, S.S. Smita, A. Biswas, S. Kumar, Development of Quercetin- 
loaded polyvinyl-alcohol/gelatin nanofibrous coating over Ti–6Al–4V bone 
implant with improved antibacterial and bioactive characteristics, J. Mater. Sci. 59 
(2024) 11799–11816, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10853-024-09899-5.
[65] Q. Wang, Y. Gao, Y. Chen, X. Wang, Q. Pei, T. Zhang, C. Wang, J. Pan, Synergistic 
enhancement of antibacterial and osteo-immunomodulatory activities of titanium 
implants via dual-responsive multifunctional surfaces, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 14 
(2025) 2404260, https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.202404260.
[66] V. Singh, D.K. Tripathi, V.K. Sharma, D. Srivastava, U. Kumar, K.M. Poluri, B. 
N. Singh, D. Kumar, V. K. R, Silk fibroin hydrogel: a novel biopolymer for sustained 
release of vancomycin drug for diabetic wound healing, J. Mol. Struct. 1286 (2023) 
135548, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molstruc.2023.135548.
[67] A. Udduttula, N. Jakubovics, I. Khan, L. Pontiroli, K.S. Rankin, P. Gentile, A. 
M. Ferreira, Layer-by-Layer coatings of collagen-hyaluronic acid loaded with an 
antibacterial Manuka Honey bioactive compound to fight metallic implant 
infections, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 15 (2023) 58119–58135, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/acsami.3c11910.
[68] W. Jiang, Y. Sun, F. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Hua, X. Wang, J. Wei, Y. Zhang, An anti- 
corrosion MAO coating containing germanium dioxide and tantalum pentoxide on 
titanium surface for facilitating osteoblastic differentiation and killing bacteria, 
J. Mater. Sci. 58 (2023) 18169–18186, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10853-023- 
09186-9.
[69] L. Mu, Y. Lian, S. Zheng, S. Chang, X. Li, C. Sun, H. Qiu, Construction and 
performance optimization of a multifunctional CHP-Ti-MAO composite coating: 
antibacterial activity, controlled drug release, and corrosion resistance, Coatings 
15 (2025) 948, https://doi.org/10.3390/coatings15080948.
[70] Y. Hu, M. Li, X. Xu, N. Ma, J. Luo, X. Wu, Q. Ping, X. Lin, T. Zhang, C. Liang, 
L. Yang, A bioactive Cu-grafted gel coating with micro-nano structures for 
simultaneous enhancement of bone regeneration and infection resistance, J. Mater. 
Chem. B 13 (2025) 7014–7023, https://doi.org/10.1039/d5tb00211g.
[71] Y. Zhao, P. He, B. Wang, J. Bai, F. Xue, C. Chu, Incorporating pH/NIR responsive 
nanocontainers into a smart self-healing coating for a magnesium alloy with 
controlled drug release, bacteria killing and osteogenesis properties, Acta 
Biomater. 174 (2024) 463–481, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2023.12.004.
[72] X. Li, F. Qi, J. Zhu, X. Niu, S. Yang, D.G. Yu, Layer-by-layer electrodeposition of 
chitosan quaternary ammonium salt antibacterial composite coating loaded with 
gentamicin, Mater. Today Commun. 41 (2024) 110683, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
mtcomm.2024.110683.
[73] Y. Zhao, P. He, J. Yao, M. Li, B. Wang, L. Han, Z. Huang, C. Guo, J. Bai, F. Xue, 
Y. Cong, W. Cai, P.K. Chu, C. Chu, pH/NIR-responsive and self-healing coatings 
with bacteria killing, osteogenesis, and angiogenesis performances on magnesium 
alloy, Biomaterials 301 (2023) 122237, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biomaterials.2023.122237.
[74] T. Lin, J. Zhang, D. Huo, F. Yang, J. Zhang, L. Huang, S.P. Deng, S. Tan, H. Chen, 
Silk fibroin-based coating with pH-dependent controlled release of Cu2+ for 
removal of implant bacterial infections, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 650 (2023) 
1893–1906, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2023.07.138.
[75] Z. Wen, X. Shi, X. Li, W. Liu, Y. Liu, R. Zhang, Y. Yu, J. Su, Mesoporous TiO2 
coatings regulate ZnO nanoparticle loading and Zn2+ release on titanium dental 
implants for sustained osteogenic and antibacterial activity, ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 15 (2023) 15235–15249, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.3c00812.
[76] K. Wang, F. Rong, H. Peng, Z. Yuan, J. Huo, P. Liu, R. Ding, C. Yan, G. Liu, T. Wang, 
P. Li, Infection microenvironment-responsive coating on titanium surfaces for On- 
Demand release of therapeutic gas and antibiotic, Adv. Healthcare Mater. 13 
(2024) 2304510, https://doi.org/10.1002/adhm.202304510.
[77] N. Yan, F. Yuan, S. Tan, T. Li, B. Dai, X. Bai, W. Ouyang, Z. Ma, H. Qiu, Z. Wu, 
Z. Xia, Plasma surface modification for inhibiting biofilm formation and 
immunomodulatory treatment of implant-related infections, Chem. Eng. J. 525 
(2025) 169719, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2025.169719.
[78] J. Guan, X. Wang, Z. Tian, F. Jia, J. Wang, L. Xie, J. Lan, P. Han, H. Lin, X. Huang, 
M. Li, Y. Huang, Controlled-release of cinnamaldehyde from MXene/ZIF8/gelatin 
composite coatings: an integrated strategy to combat implant-associated infection, 
Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 251 (2025) 114615, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
colsurfb.2025.114615.
[79] Y. Hu, F. Zhang, J. Zhou, Y. Yang, D. Ding, M. Li, C. Wang, B. Wang, J. Yu, F. Jiang, 
D.G. Yu, H. Shen, Electrospun tri-layer core-sheath nanofibrous coating for 
sequential treatment of postoperative complications in orthopedic implants, Small 
21 (2025) e05523, https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202505523.
[80] J. Pan, K. Li, C. Li, Z. Wang, H. Shi, D. Jiang, H. Li, M. Yuan, Design and 
preparation of antibacterial coatings on biodegradable polylactic acid-based 
medical implants, Mater. Des. 257 (2025) 114353, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
matdes.2025.114353.
[81] A. Stheme De Jubecourt, P. Seng, D. Delarbre, R. Ambrosino, B. Blondel, K. Farah, 
A. Stein, Post-spinal surgery infections: a two-year follow-up study on risks, 
resistance, and recovery, BMC Infect. Dis. 25 (2025) 1492, https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s12879-025-11855-w.
[82] K. Mostofi, K. Shirbache, G. Caragliano, Postoperative infection of the spine: 
management and outcomes at a single institution. A retrospective study, Wounds 
36 (2024) 402–406, https://doi.org/10.25270/wnds/24064.
[83] D.J. Alfin, D.J. Shilong, G.M. Bot, W. Dengunu Salun, Surgical site infection rate in 
spine surgery, incidence, and risk factors: a ten-year retrospective cohort review in 
a developing neurosurgical centre, BMC Surg. 25 (2025) 127, https://doi.org/ 
10.1186/s12893-025-02846-4.
[84] Z. Mao, X. Bi, C. Yu, L. Chen, J. Shen, Y. Huang, Z. Wu, H. Qi, J. Guan, X. Shu, 
B. Yu, Y. Zheng, Mechanically robust and personalized silk fibroin-magnesium 
composite scaffolds with water-responsive shape-memory for irregular bone 
regeneration, Nat. Commun. 15 (2024) 4160, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467- 
024-48417-8.
[85] K. Quan, Z. Zhang, Y. Ren, H.J. Busscher, H.C. van der Mei, B.W. Peterson, On- 
demand pulling-off of magnetic nanoparticles from biomaterial surfaces through 
implant-associated infectious biofilms for enhanced antibiotic efficacy, Mater. Sci. 
Eng. C 131 (2021) 112526, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2021.112526.
K. Quan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
Bioactive Materials 61 (2026) 712–729 
729