www.afm-journal.de
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
2008720  (1 of 15)
Full Paper
Copper Clusters: An Effective Antibacterial for Eradicating 
Multidrug-Resistant Bacterial Infection In Vitro and In Vivo
Xiangchun Zhang, Zhichao Zhang, Qingming Shu, Chao Xu, Qinqin Zheng, Zhao Guo, 
Chen Wang, Zhenxia Hao, Xin Liu, Guoqing Wang, Wangjun Yan,* Hongping Chen,* 
and Chengyin Lu*
Infections caused by multidrug-resistant (MDR) bacteria pose a threat to 
human health worldwide, making new effective antibacterial agents urgently 
desired. To date, it is still a great challenge to develop new antibiotics for 
MDR bacteria with clear antibacterial mechanisms. Herein, a novel alterna-
tive antibacterial copper clusters (CuCs) molecule is precisely synthesized 
utilizing an artificially designed theanine peptide. The prepared CuCs 
exhibit excellent broad-spectrum antibacterial activity in vitro, including 
gram-positive bacteria (methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus [MRSA], 
Staphylococcus aureus, and Staphylococcus epidermidis) and gram-negative 
bacteria (Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa). The robust antibac-
terial effect is due to its ability to not only destroy the bacterial wall struc-
ture, but also regulate the ratio of GSH/GSSG by inhibiting the activity of 
glutathione reductase, thus causing the outbreak of reactive oxygen species 
and ultimately leading to bacterial death. In addition, in vivo studies demon-
strate that CuCs can significantly rescue skin wound infections and sepsis in 
mice caused by MRSA, and has the same therapeutic efficacy as mupirocin 
ointment and first-line clinically anchored anti-MRSA drug vancomycin. 
Moreover, CuCs exhibit extremely low cytotoxicity to normal mammalian 
cells compared to silver and platinum clusters. With further development and 
optimization, CuCs has great potential as a new class of antibacterial agents 
to fight antibiotic-resistant pathogens.
DOI: 10.1002/adfm.202008720
decades of abusing antibiotics, the rapid 
emergence of antimicrobial resistance 
(AMR) is now a significant public health 
problem.[1] Infectious diseases caused by 
resistant bacteria are highly lethal globally 
and are predicted to kill 10 million people 
annually by 2050 if effective control is not 
achieved.[2] For example, gram-positive 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus 
(MRSA) is an infamous major multidrug-
resistant (MDR) bacterium, that can cause 
pneumonia, endocarditis, skin infections, 
and sepsis.[3] Gram-negative bacteria, such 
as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, were found 
to be resistant to carbapenem or third-
generation cephalosporins.[4] The emer-
gence of resistance to vancomycin, once 
known as the last line of defense against 
MRSA infection, and colistin, an antibiotic 
of last resort for gram-negative bacteria, 
has caused more concern.[5] As conven-
tional antibiotics cannot effectively con-
trol infections caused by these bacteria, 
development of alternative antibacterial 
approaches is urgently needed.
The antibacterial nature of metals was 
discovered in 1676.[6] Since then, people 
have used silver-coated containers for 
storage to prevent bacterial contamination.[7] Ancient Egyptians 
used copper to treat wound infections.[8] Once antibiotics were 
developed, metal sterilization became less popular. However, 
due to the ongoing AMR crisis, metal materials, especially 
1. Introduction
Since antibiotics began to be used in the 1930s, the threat of 
bacterial infections has dramatically declined. However, due to 
The ORCID identification number(s) for the author(s) of this article 
can be found under https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202008720.
Dr. X. Zhang, Q. Zheng, Dr. C. Wang, Dr. Z. Hao, Prof. X. Liu,  
G. Wang, Prof. H. Chen, Prof. C. Lu
Tea Research Institute
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences
Hangzhou 310008, China
E-mail: thean27@tricaas.com; lchy@tricaas.com
Dr. Z. Zhang, Prof. W. Yan
Department of Musculoskeletal Tumor
Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center
Shanghai 200032, China
E-mail: yanwj@fudan.edu.cn
Dr. Q. Shu
Department of Pathology, the Third Medical Centre Chinese PLA
(People’s Liberation Army)  
General Hospital
Beijing 100039, China
Dr. C. Xu
College of Chemistry and Material Science
Shandong Agricultural University
Taian 271018, China
Dr. Z. Guo
School of Basic Medical Sciences
Fujian Medical University
Fuzhou 350122, China
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2008720

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2008720  (2 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
nanometallic materials, are once again receiving attention 
for their superior bactericidal ability and low possibility of 
inducing resistance.[9] For instance, gold,[10] silver,[11] plat-
inum,[12] copper,[13] and bimetallic nanomaterials have received 
the most attention due to their excellent antibacterial proper-
ties.[14] However, the toxicity of nanometallic materials to cells 
and animals limits clinical research, and their exact steriliza-
tion mechanism is still controversial.[15] To address this issue, 
more recently, researchers have tried to change the ligands or 
use a gentle synthesis method to turn metal nanomaterials into 
metal clusters.[16] We found that Au nanoparticles had poor sta-
bility and poor absorption in vivo compared with Au clusters.[17] 
Metal clusters with low toxicity, ultra-small size (<2 nm), pre-
cisely simple structural composition, and good biocompatibility 
have been actively investigated by researchers.[16] Among them, 
copper clusters (CuCs) have received extensive attention and 
have the following advantages: 1) they can be easily acquired 
at low cost, making them potentially applicable for large-scale 
applications;[18] 2) copper has been used in agriculture to inhibit 
bacterial infections for over a century,[19] and 3) contrast to gold, 
silver, and platinum, copper is a trace element necessary for 
the human body. Excess copper in the body can be easily elimi-
nated.[20] And it was reported that copper clusters had good 
biosafety.[21]
Although the bactericidal mechanisms of nanometallic mate-
rials were related to the release of metal ions and the accu-
mulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), it is still unclear 
whether ROS is a cause or consequence of bacterial death.[22] 
Glutathione reductase (GR), an important enzyme in the cell, 
catalyzes glutathione disulfide (GSSG) to glutathione (GSH) 
with the participation of NADPH.[23] GSH is critical for elimi-
nating intracellular ROS as a defense against oxidant-mediated 
injuries.[24] GR plays an important role in regulating, modu-
lating, and maintaining cellular redox homoeostasis.[25] If the 
enzymatic activity of GR is inhibited, the GSH/GSSG ratio 
will be disrupted, and the ROS defense system will collapse, 
resulting in a ROS burst.[23] Thus, we hypothesized that inacti-
vation of GR may be the cause of ROS accumulation. The accu-
mulation of ROS with unpaired electrons was particularly reac-
tive to attack biomacromolecules and accelerated the rupture of 
the bacterial wall membrane, and eventually leading to bacterial 
death.
Herein, we developed a gentle method for constructing CuCs 
using theanine peptide. One CuCs molecule was composed of 
13 copper atoms and exhibited a broad spectrum of bactericidal 
ability at extremely low doses in vitro compared to those copper 
nanoparticle.[13a] Our results suggested that CuCs kill bacteria 
in two ways: 1) CuCs could destroy the structure of bacterial 
wall; 2) CuCs inhibited GR protein activity, leading to a disorder 
of the GSH/GSSG ratio, causing ROS burst and eventually bac-
terial death (Scheme 1). And we confirmed that the toxicity of 
CuCs to bacteria did not come from released copper ions. In 
addition, a melatonin intervention study confirmed that the 
ROS burst was the cause rather than the consequence of bacte-
rial death. Excessive ROS in bacteria can not only attack DNA 
macromolecules, but also accelerate the destruction of bacterial 
wall structure, eventually causing bacterial death. Importantly, 
in vivo rapid recovery of skin infections and sepsis caused by 
MRSA in mice further verified the excellent therapeutic efficacy 
of CuCs. Moreover, we found that CuCs exhibited extremely low 
cytotoxicity to normal mammalian cells compared to silver and 
platinum clusters. Taken together, we demonstrated that CuCs 
were exceptionally effective against MDR bacterial infections. 
With low cost and good biosafety, CuCs have a great potential 
for clinical anti-infection treatments.
2. Results and Discussion
2.1. Preparation of CuCs
An illustration of CuCs formation is shown in Figure  1A. 
The theanine peptide (sequence: CCYXXXXX, where X is 
theanine) was designed to synthesize CuCs. The structure, 
purity, and mass spectra of the theanine peptide are shown 
in Figures S1–S3, Supporting Information, respectively. The 
peptide had two domains: Domain 1 (CCY) was applied to cap-
ture the Cu cluster via the -SH groups of cysteine. Domain 2 
(XXXXX) was composed of several theanines, which are natural 
plant secondary metabolites in tea plants, to enhance the bio-
compatibility of the clusters.
The as-synthesized CuCs were separated and purified using 
centrifugal, molecular sieves and protein purification systems, 
as described in the Experimental Section and Figure S4, Sup-
porting Information. After purification, the optical characteris-
tics of CuCs was measured by spectroscopy. Ultraviolet–visible 
(UV–vis) spectrophotometry was employed to confirm the 
Scheme 1.  Schematic illustration of CuCs healing local MRSA skin wound 
infection. CuCs kill bacteria through two mechanisms: 1) destruction of 
the bacterial wall and membrane structure, causing the leakage of intra-
cellular components; 2) CuCs binds to GR protein, inhibiting GSSG 
reduction to GSH, destroying the intracellular antioxidant defense system 
and inducing ROS burst. ROS with unpaired electrons is particularly reac-
tive to attack genomes and accelerates the rupture of bacterial wall and 
eventually induce bacterial death.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2008720
 16163028, 2021, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202008720 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2008720  (3 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
formation of CuCs. As shown in Figure  1B, the absorption 
peak of the peptide was at 275 nm, which was attributed to the 
π–π conjugate structure of the phenol side group in tyrosine. 
The UV–vis spectra of CuCs exhibited distinct absorption peaks 
at 243, 295, and 322 nm (Figure 1B, blue curve), consistent with 
those of peptide protected metal clusters.[26] The absorption 
peak at 322 nm was the characteristic absorption peak of CuCs, 
which was consistent with the maximum excitation wavelength 
at 323  nm (Figure  1C, black curve). The maximum emission 
peak of CuCs was at 415  nm (Figure  1C, blue curve) under 
the 323  nm excitation (Figure  1C, black curve). CuCs exhib-
ited blue fluorescence under UV irradiation at 365  nm (inset 
of Figure  1C). Moreover, Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) 
spectroscopy was performed to further investigate the surface 
composition of CuCs (Figure 1D). Disappearance of the typical 
-SH peak in CuCs at ≈2500 cm−1 in the FT-IR spectra indicated 
S-H breaking up and the formation of Cu-S bonds. As depicted 
in the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectrum, the 
peaks of C, N, O, S, and Cu were clearly observed (Figure S5, 
Supporting Information). Two intense peaks at 933.28 and 
952.78  eV were assigned to the binding energy of Cu(0) Cu 
2p3/2 and Cu 2p1/2 (Figure 1E). Despite the absence of a satellite 
peak in Figure 1E, a weak peak at 943.0 eV was observed, indi-
cating that there was only a very small part of the proportion of 
Cu(II) in the CuCs.[27] Meanwhile, binding energy of 163.54 and 
164.54  eV for S 2p3/2 and S 2p1/2, respectively, are depicted in 
Figure 1F, which is consistent with the binding energy of S in 
the Cu-S bond. These results further indicated the conjugation 
between Cu and the -SH group in the peptide. The Zeta Poten-
tial of CuCs was 28.11 ± 0.15 mV (Figure S6, Supporting Infor-
mation). The fluorescence quantum yield of CuCs at 100  µm 
was 2.47% (Figure S7, Supporting Information). The formula 
of CuCs was examined by electrospray ionization mass spectro­
metry (ESI-MS).[28] As shown in Figure 1G, the formula of CuCs 
was Cu13P3, where P represents the theanine peptide. Peaks at 
m/z = 868.8, 1034.2, and 1085.7 were assigned to [Cu13P3 + Na + 
4H]5+, [Cu13S6 + Na]+, and [Cu13P3 + Na + 3H]4+, respectively. On 
the other hand, the maximum excitation and emission peaks of 
Figure 1.  Illustration of CuCs formation and its characterization. A) Formation of CuCs. B) Absorption spectrum of theanine peptide and CuCs. 
C) Fluorescence excitation (black curve, 323 nm) and emission (blue curve, 415 nm) spectrum of CuCs. Insets: digital image of CuCs under a 365 nm 
portable UV light. D) Comparison of the FT-IR spectrum of theanine peptide (black curve) and CuCs (red curve). E,F) High-resolution XPS spectra 
of Cu 2P and S 2P of CuCs. G) Electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (ESI-MS) of CuCs. The mass spectrum demonstrated that the molecule of 
CuCs was Cu13P3, where P represents theanine peptide. Peak "a" represent [Cu13P3 + Na + 3H]4+ of Cu13P3.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2008720
 16163028, 2021, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202008720 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2008720  (4 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
CuCs were located at 323 and 415 nm (Figure 1C), respectively, 
similar to those reported characteristic fluorescence of clusters 
with Cu13 core.[29] This results can be further demonstrated by 
their absorption spectrum (Figure  1B). CuCs demonstrated a 
newly absorption band at around 322 nm compared with pep-
tide, which is consistent with the reported absorption peak with 
Cu13 core.[29a] Furthermore, CuCs exhibited excellent stability. 
The fluorescence intensity was not only stable in the system 
of H2O, PBS, and cell culture medium, but also remained 
unchanged for 90 days (Figures S8 and S9, Supporting Infor-
mation). Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-
MS) was employed to determine the release of copper ions 
during the storage of CuCs. As shown in Figure S10, Sup-
porting Information, after CuCs were stored for different times, 
they were purified using molecular sieve ultrafiltration tubes 
(Millipore, Ultracel-3K). If CuCs release copper ions during 
storage, they will leak out of the molecular sieve. The CuCs in 
the inner tube was collected for ICP-MS quantification. And 
it was found that the concentration of CuCs in the inner tube 
remained unchanged after purification, indicating that CuCs 
had good stability.
2.2. In Vitro Antibacterial Activity
We selected three gram-positive bacteria (MRSA, Staphylo-
coccus aureus, and Staphylococcus epidermidis,) and two gram-
negative bacteria (Escherichia coli and P. aeruginosa) to evaluate 
the antibacterial activity of CuCs. First, the bactericidal activity 
of CuCs was estimated by measuring the growth curve of 
bacterial cells at OD 600  nm. Bacterial cells were inhibited 
in a dose-dependent manner in response to CuCs exposure 
(Figure 2A,B). Next, we performed quantitative analysis using 
colony-forming units (CFUs) on agar plates to evaluate the tox-
icity of CuCs to bacteria. Agar plate images and quantitative 
histograms of the colonies are shown in Figure  2C. Bacterial 
cells’ survival gradually reduced after incubation with CuCs, 
indicating the dose-dependent bactericidal activity of CuCs. 
After treatment with 200 µm CuCs, bacterial survival rates 
were only 19.24% for S. aureus, 16.70% for MRSA, 19.56% for 
S. epidermidis, 26.89% for E. coli, and 27.94% for P. aeruginosa 
(Figure  2C; Table S1, Supporting Information). Moreover, in 
vitro antibacterial activity was further evaluated using the Live/
Dead double staining fluorescent dye SYTO9/propidium iodide 
(PI) (Figure 2G). MRSA and E. coli were stained with SYTO9 
and PI. The SYTO9 with green fluorescence could stain all bac-
teria cells, whereas PI only stained cells with damaged wall. 
When SYTO9 and PI dyes stained a cell at the same time, the 
fluorescence intensity of SYTO9 would be weaker. As illus-
trated in Figure 2G, MRSA and E. coli without CuCs treatment 
were stained with bright green fluorescence, indicating that the 
bacteria had an integrated wall and membrane structure. After 
treatment with CuCs, bacterial cells exhibited red fluorescence, 
and the fluorescence intensity was dose-dependently correlated 
with the concentration of CuCs. Almost all MRSA treated with 
CuCs (200 µm) exhibited red fluorescence, and the fluores-
cence intensity was stronger compared to E. coli, indicating that 
CuCs exhibited high antibacterial activity against MRSA. These 
results are consistent with previous experiments showing that 
CuCs exhibited superior bactericidal activity against gram-posi-
tive bacteria (Figure 2A–C). This may be because gram-negative 
bacteria have a special outer membrane structure compared 
with gram-positive bacteria. These outer membrane structures 
are composed of glycerophospholipid, lipopolysaccharides, 
and lipproteins, which afford gram-negative bacteria protec-
tion from antibacterial agent, and make them adapt to different 
external environments.[30]
Next, the in vitro cytocompatibility of CuCs was inves-
tigated by examining its toxicity on cell lines derived from 
normal tissues including human umbilical vein endothelial 
cells (HUVEC), human airway epithelial cells (16HBE cells), 
and mouse embryo cells (NIH/3T3 cells). After treatment with 
CuCs at 400 µm, the survival rates of the cells were 98.23% for 
16HBE cells, 97.21% for HUVEC and 96.83% for NIH/3T3 cells 
(Figure 2D; Figure S11, Supporting Information). In addition, 
CuCs exhibited extremely low cytotoxicity compared to AgCs 
and PtCs constructed with theanine peptide (Figure 2E; Figure 
S12, Supporting Information). These results indicated that 
CuCs did not exert obvious toxicity on normal mammalian cells 
at high concentrations (400 µm), but were able to kill bacteria at 
low concentrations (200 µm). Furthermore, we used a hemol-
ysis experiment to investigate the effect of CuCs on the rup-
ture and lysis of red blood cells (RBCs). As shown in Figure 2F, 
CuCs did not cause obvious hemolysis, indicating their excel-
lent blood biocompatibility.
2.3. Antibacterial Mechanism Study
Our results demonstrated that CuCs effectively inhibited both 
gram-positive and gram-negative bacterial growth in vitro. We 
next examined how CuCs kill bacteria by utilizing gram-pos-
itive MDR MRSA and gram-negative E. coli as representative 
organisms. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of MRSA and 
E. coli (Figure  3A) showed that CuCs destroyed the wall and 
membrane of the bacteria in a dose-dependent manner. As the 
concentration of CuCs increased, the structure of the bacte-
rial wall and membrane was gradually destroyed (Figure  3A). 
As depicted in Figure 3B, the wall and membrane of bacteria 
treated with CuCs (200 µm) were severely damaged as shown 
by  transmission electron microscope (TEM) and high angle 
annular dark field scanning (HAADF). As shown in the images 
of element mappings (Figure 3B), bacteria with broken struc-
tures had a large amount of Cu, suggesting that CuCs were 
responsible for bacterial destruction. When the bacterial struc-
ture is destroyed, the intracellular components of bacteria 
including ions, DNA, RNA, and protein, flow out of the cell. 
We used a microplate reader and inductively coupled plasma 
atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES) to quantify the con-
centration of extracellular nucleic acids and K+ in bacteria after 
CuCs treatment. As shown in Figure  3C, the optical density 
value of extracellular nucleic acid of MRSA treated with CuCs 
(200 µm) was enhanced by 15.76-fold compared to the untreated 
group. As expected, the concentration of extracellular K+ sig-
nificantly increased from 13.36 to 35.08  µg mL−1 in response 
to 200 µm treatment (Figure  3D). A similar result of nucleic 
acid and K+ leakage was also found in E. coli (Figure  3E,F). 
Moreover, structural damage and leakage of intracellular 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2008720
 16163028, 2021, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202008720 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2008720  (5 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
Figure 2.  In vitro antibacterial activities and biosafety of CuCs. A) Growth curves and B) histograms of S. aureus (SA), MRSA, S. epidermidis (SE), E. coli (EC), and 
P. aeruginosa (PA) exposed to different concentrations of CuCs for 9 h. C) The agar plate method to evaluate inhibition of bacterial growth by CuCs at different 
concentrations. D) Cell toxicity evaluation of CuCs on human 16HBE and HUVEC cells for 48 h. E) Cytotoxicity of CuCs, AuCs, AgCs, and PtCs at 400 µm in 16HBE 
cells at 48 h. F) Hemolysis analysis. Ultrapure water was used as a positive control, and PBS was used as a negative control. The inset shows the photo directly 
observed after adding CuCs for 4 h. G) Viability fluorescent staining of E. coli and MRSA observed by CLSM. Data are presented as the mean ± s.d., **p < 0.01.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2008720
 16163028, 2021, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202008720 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2008720  (6 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
components were also observed in S. aureus, S. epidermidis, 
and P. aeruginosa (Figures S13– S15, Supporting Information). 
These results indicated that CuCs destroyed the bacterial wall 
and membrane, inducing leakage of intracellular components, 
such as nucleic acids and K+.
Furthermore, we found that damage to the bacterial wall and 
membrane was not the only active mechanism for bacterial 
death. CuCs also regulated the production of ROS to kill bacte-
rial cells. As depicted in Figure 4A, because CuCs have inherent 
fluorescent properties (Figure  1C), CuCs could label MRSA 
with blue fluorescence and induced excessive production of 
ROS in MRSA. As expected, the fluorescence intensity and 
ROS levels in MRSA cells increased with increasing concentra-
tions of CuCs (Figure 4A; Figure S16, Supporting Information). 
The fluorescent signals of CuCs and ROS were colocalized 
on the same MRSA cells, indicating that CuCs induced ROS 
production in situ in MRSA (Figure 4B). Similar results were 
also found in E. coli (Figures S17 and S18, Supporting Informa-
tion). Endogenously generated ROS plays important signaling 
roles, but when excessive ROS levels exceed the cellular elimi-
nation capacity, a chain reaction is triggered that leads to the 
destruction of biological macromolecules (e.g., DNA, protein, 
and lipids). To determine whether genomic DNA of the MRSA 
and E. coli were fragmented, we performed agarose gel electro-
phoresis and GelRed staining. As shown in Figure 4C, genomic 
DNA treated with CuCs (200 µm) was damaged, as evidenced 
by fragmentation (lanes 3 and 5), while genomic DNA of MRSA 
and E. coli maintained integrity in the control group (lanes 2 
Figure 3.  CuCs destroy the structure of the bacterial wall and membrane. A) Representative SEM images of MRSA and E. coli treated with different 
concentrations of CuCs. B) Representative TEM and HAADF-STEM elemental mapping images of MRSA and E. coli before and after treatment with 
CuCs. C, D) The content of nucleic acids and K+ leakage in MRSA culture medium quantified after treatment with different concentrations of CuCs. 
E, F) The content of nucleic acids and K+ leakage in E. coli culture medium quantified after treatment with different concentrations of CuCs. Data are 
presented as the mean ± s.d., **p < 0.01.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2008720
 16163028, 2021, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202008720 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2008720  (7 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
and 4), suggesting that overloaded ROS levels destroyed bac-
terial DNA. Arguing that bacterial death was a consequence 
rather than a cause of the increase in ROS levels, we next per-
formed a ROS depletion experiment. Melatonin is well known 
for improving sleep quality and has powerful ROS scavenging 
ability.[31] CuCs and melatonin were introduced into bacteria 
together, and intracellular ROS decreased, which attenuated the 
death of MRSA and E. coli (Figure  4D; Figures S19 and S20, 
Supporting Information). These results indicated that mela-
tonin rescues bacterial death caused by ROS. Notably, when 
intracellular ROS was depleted, 22.43% of MRSA and 17.69% 
of E. coli deaths remained (Figure 4D; Figure S19, Supporting 
Information), indicating that ROS outbreak was a major, but 
not the only, cause of bacterial death.
As depicted in Figure S21A, Supporting Information, when 
the ROS triggered by CuCs in bacteria was depleted, some of 
the MRSA were dead (Figure S21B, Supporting Information), 
and the structure of the bacterial wall was also destroyed 
(Figure S21C, Supporting Information), indicating that without 
the presence of ROS, CuCs could destroy the structure of 
the bacterial wall and cause the MRSA death. When MRSA 
was treated with CuCs at 200  µm, the ROS level was signifi-
cantly increased (Figure S21A, Supporting Information), and 
only 33.64% of MRSA survived compared with that of 76.86% 
where ROS was exhausted (Figure S21B, Supporting Informa-
tion). And the wall structure of MRSA had been more severely 
damaged (Figure S21D, Supporting Information). Therefore, 
we speculated that ROS burst and bacterial wall structure 
destruction was triggered by CuCs at the same time and ROS 
accumulation could accelerate the destruction of bacterial wall 
structure. On the other hand, bacteria cells were treated with 
Rosup (Beyotime), which can cause the accumulation of ROS in 
bacteria cells. As shown in Figure S21, Supporting Information, 
Rosup could significantly increase the level of ROS in bacteria, 
Figure 4.  CuCs increase ROS levels by inhibiting the enzymatic activity of glutathione reductase (GR). A) MRSA showed blue fluorescence after incuba-
tion with CuCs accompanied by the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) with green fluorescence. B) The fluorescence of the CuCs and ROS 
were co-localized in MRSA. Blue fluorescence and green fluorescence represent CuCs and ROS, respectively. Merged-BF indicates the fluorescence 
merged with bright field imaging. C) CuCs induced DNA fragmentation: 1) DNA marker; 2) genomic DNA of untreated MRSA; 3) genomic DNA of 
MRSA treated with CuCs; 4) genomic DNA of untreated E. coli; and 5) genomic DNA of E. coli treated with CuCs. D) Survival of MRSA after simultaneous 
treatment with CuCs and melatonin. E) Survival of MRSA and E. coli after treatment with Cu2+. F) GSH levels in MRSA and E. coli after treatment with 
CuCs. G) Enzymatic activity of GR after treatment with CuCs in vitro. H) Mass of Cu bound to GR protein quantified by ICP-MS. I) Enzymatic activity 
of GR in MRSA and E. coli after treatment with CuCs. Data are presented as the mean ± s.d., **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2008720
 16163028, 2021, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202008720 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2008720  (8 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
but 82.27% of MRSA were still alive compared with that of 
33.64%. The structure of MRSA wall treated by CuCs was more 
severely destroyed compared with that of Rosup treatment 
(Figure S21D,E, Supporting Information). These results sug-
gested that the accumulation of ROS alone cannot significantly 
lead to the destruction of the bacterial wall structure and cause 
bacterial death compared with that of CuCs treatment. Based 
on these results, we speculate that CuCs can destroy the bac-
terial wall structure, and the excessive ROS triggered by CuCs 
in bacteria can not only attack DNA macromolecules, but also 
accelerate the destruction of bacterial wall structure, eventually 
causing bacterial death. Interestingly, even high concentrations 
of peptide ligands (1 mm) and Cu2+ (2 mm) exerted no obvious 
toxicity to MRSA or E. coli, indicating that CuCs itself triggered 
the ROS burst and bacterial death (Figure 4E; Figure S22, Sup-
porting Information). On the other hand, copper nanoparticles 
(CuNPs) was synthesized according to the previous reports.[32] 
We found that the catalytic ability of CuNPs was higher than 
that of CuCs, and CuNPs could catalyze TMB faster under the 
same concentration conditions (Figure S23, Supporting Infor-
mation). However, the bactericidal ability of CuNPs was not as 
good as CuCs (Figure S23, Supporting Information). Therefore, 
in this study, we believe that the catalysis of CuCs was not the 
main cause of bacterial death.
We next examined how CuCs triggered the production of 
ROS in bacteria. To address this issue, we first investigated 
GR. GR is an important enzyme that catalyzes the reduction 
of GSSG to GSH with the participation of NADPH in cells.[23] 
GSH is critical for defense against oxidant-mediated injuries. If 
the enzymatic activity of GR is inhibited, the GSH/GSSG ratio 
will be disrupted, and the ROS defense system will be weak-
ened, resulting in bacterial ROS overload. Previous studies 
have found that copper exposure can cause GR inactivation in 
Chlorella vulgaris, Heliscus lugdunensis, and in the kidney of 
fish.[33] Yoshino et al. proved that copper can bind to GR and 
cause it to be cleaved, but the binding sites of the GR for 
copper remains obscure.[34] Therefore, we investigated the 
effect of CuCs on GR activity. As shown in Figure 4F, levels of 
GSH in MRSA and E. coli were both decreased after treatment 
with CuCs. After mixing with CuCs at 37 °C for 1 h, the enzy-
matic activity of GR was strictly inhibited (Figure  4G). Strik-
ingly, when the concentration of CuCs increased to 20 µm, GR 
activity was almost entirely ablated (Figure 4G). After purifica-
tion by molecular sieve, ICP-MS study revealed that the binding 
ratio of copper to the GR protein was 11.66 mg g−1 (Figure 4H). 
As expected, after CuCs was incubated with bacteria, the enzy-
matic activity of GR in both MRSA and E. coli was effectively 
inhibited (Figure  4I). Therefore, we speculated that CuCs 
bound to GR in the form of a GR-CuCs or GR-Cu complex, 
resulting in the inactivation of GR.
Together, we proposed that CuCs killed bacteria through two 
mechanisms. One involved destruction of the bacterial wall and 
membrane structure, causing leakage of intracellular compo-
nents. Another was to inactivate GR through combination with 
GR protein, which inhibited GSSG reduction to GSH, subse-
quently destroying the intracellular antioxidant defense system. 
Then the burst of ROS with unpaired electrons was particularly 
reactive to attack the genome, which resulted in DNA fragmen-
tation. And the overloaded endogenous ROS could accelerate 
the rupture of bacterial wall and eventually induced bacterial 
death.
2.4. In Vivo Treatment of MRSA-Infected Skin Wound Healing
A mouse model of skin infection with bacteria is commonly 
used to evaluate the antibacterial effect of drugs in vivo. After 
demonstrating that CuCs exhibited high bactericidal ability in 
vitro with no obvious toxicity to normal mammalian cells, we 
further evaluated its therapeutic efficacy in vivo using MRSA-
infected skin wound model (Figure  5A). The “Un-inf” group 
in Figure  5B represents mice with uninfected skin wounds. 
The positive control group used mupirocin ointment (MO), 
which is a conventional topical antibiotic, to treat and eradi-
cate local S. aureus infections. Groups CuCs-1 and CuCs-2 in 
Figure  5B represent 1 and 2  mg kg−1 doses administered to 
mice. We observed that local administration of both CuCs-1 
and CuCs-2 effectively inhibited wound infection and obvi-
ously promoted healing (Figure 5B). Compared to the wound 
area of 26.14 ± 3.74 mm2 in the PBS group on the 9th day, the 
infected wound areas of the CuCs-1, CuCs-2, and MO groups 
were 5.40 ± 2.17, 2.42 ± 2.10, and 4.45 ± 0.81 mm2 respectively 
(Figure 5C; Table S2, Supporting Information). The wound area 
of the CuCs-2-treated mice was similar to that of uninfected 
mice (1.92  ± 0.21 mm2), indicating that local administration 
of 2  mg kg−1 CuCs eradicated MRSA and accelerated healing 
of infected wounds. The weight of mice dropped rapidly at the 
beginning of MRSA infection, and as treatment progressed, 
mice steadily recovered weight faster than the PBS group 
(Figure 5D).
Inflammatory cytokines, including IL-6, IL-1β and TNF-α, 
play a key role in the inflammatory response of bacterial infec-
tions.[22] We quantitatively assessed the changes in IL-6 and 
TNF-α at different time points after MRSA infection in serum 
as a surrogate of recovery in mice. As shown in Figure  5E, 
IL-6 reached its maximum level on day 3 of MRSA infection 
in CuCs and MO treatment groups, then gradually decreased 
and returned to normal levels on day 9. However, IL-6 in the 
PBS group reached its maximum level on day 6, and IL-6 levels 
were still 25.63 compared to 7.89 pg mL−1 in the uninfected 
mice on day 9 (Figure  5E). As expected, changes in TNF-α 
during the healing of infected wounds was similar to that of 
IL-6 (Figure  5F). These results suggested that CuCs acceler-
ated MRSA-infected wound healing in mice by down-regulating 
levels of inflammatory cytokines. Serum C-reactive protein 
(CRP) is a sensitive and objective indicator of bacterial infec-
tion. Compared to PBS, the amount of CRP in both CuCs and 
MO-treated mice tended to be normal (4.23 mg L−1 in Un-inf 
group) on day 9, suggesting that the infections had recovered 
(Figure  5G). After treatment, bacteria in the infected wound 
sites of different groups were quantified using the agar plate 
method. The number of MRSA colonies in CuCs-2-treated 
mice was only 3.93% that of the PBS group (Figure 5H), cor-
responding to the results above of infected wound healing and 
cytokine changes (Figure 5B–G). The theanine peptide treated 
alone could not accelerate wound healing, nor can it regulate 
the expression of IL-6 and TNF-α (Figure S24, Supporting 
Information). And the amount of CRP in peptide-treated mice 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2008720
 16163028, 2021, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202008720 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2008720  (9 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
Figure 5.  CuCs accelerate healing of skin wounds infected with MRSA. A) Schematic diagram of skin wound infection with MRSA and treatment with 
CuCs. Mice were evaluated on the 9th day. B) Representative images of wound changes in MRSA-infected mice after treatment with CuCs and mupirocin 
ointment (MO) within 9 days. The Un-inf group represents uninfected skin wounds. C,D) Wound area and body weight changes in MRSA-infected 
mice from day 1 to day 9 during the treatment. E,F) Changes in IL-6 and TNF-α levels in serum at different time points during infection and treatment 
in mice. G) Levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) in mouse serum after the end of treatment. H) Evaluation of bacterial colonies inside the infected skin 
after treatment. I) Infected skin wound tissue evaluated by H&E staining and IHC of IL-6 and TNF-α after treatment. Data are presented as the mean 
± s.d., **p < 0.01.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2008720
 16163028, 2021, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202008720 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2008720  (10 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
was still 12.57 mg L−1 on day 9, suggesting that the mice still 
suffered from infection (Figure S24D, Supporting Informa-
tion). These results indicate that it was CuCs rather than thea-
nine peptide that played a therapeutic role.
To further determine the anti-infective efficacy of CuCs, we 
assessed histopathology changes in MRSA-infected tissue sites 
at the end of treatment. After hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) 
staining, the epidermis and dermis structure in infected tissue 
in the PBS group was severely damaged (Figure 5I, H&E). In 
contrast, infected tissue in CuCs and MO-treated mice formed 
intact regenerated epithelium and had returned to normal 
histological morphology (Figure  5I, H&E). We then evaluated 
expression levels of the inflammatory cytokines IL-6 and TNF-
α in the infected tissues by immunohistochemistry (IHC). 
Infected wound tissue in the PBS group secreted a large amount 
of IL-6 and TNF-α, which could damage the wound tissue and 
aggravate the inflammatory response in mice (Figure 5I). After 
treatment, secretion of IL-6 and TNF-α returned to near normal 
levels, indicating that the inflammatory response was effec-
tively inhibited by CuCs (Figure 5I). Moreover, the heart, liver, 
spleen, lung, and kidney of mice were stained by H&E after 
treatment, and no obvious pathological abnormalities were 
observed (Figure S25, Supporting Information). Taken together, 
these results clearly revealed that CuCs was a promising anti-
bacterial material for local MRSA infections due to their excel-
lent antibacterial effect and good biocompatibility.
2.5. In Vivo Rescue of Mice Suffering from MRSA Sepsis
To verify that CuCs exhibited a wide range of anti-infective 
effects, we performed rescue experiments in the mice suf-
fering from sepsis induced by systemic MRSA infection. The 
mouse sepsis model was established by intraperitoneal injec-
tion of MRSA at a concentration of 1 × 106 CFU. Immediately 
after MRSA infection, mice were intraperitoneally injected with 
5 mg kg−1 body weight CuCs, and a second dose was given 12 h 
later (Figure  6A). The healthy group was not infected with 
MRSA. Mice infected with MRSA in the model group were 
treated with PBS. The positive control was treated with vanco-
mycin, which is considered to be the last line of defense against 
MRSA infection in clinical practice. As shown in Figure  6B, 
the survival rate of MRSA infected mice without drug treat-
ment was only 20%. In contrast, the survival rate of CuCs-
treated mice increased to 60%, higher than that of mice treated 
with 50% vancomycin. Severe systemic infection causes mice 
to become lethargic, exhibit decreasing activity, reduce food 
intake, and lose body weight. Body weight changes in mice 
during treatment is an important indicator to evaluate thera-
peutic efficacy. As shown in Figure  6C, the body weight of 
healthy mice without MRSA infection increased 0.74 ± 0.19 g 
within 48 h. The body weight of mice treated with CuCs and 
vancomycin began to slowly recover and increased at 48 h post 
infection, while the body weight of mice treated with PBS did 
not significantly increase (Figure 6C).
When mice are infected with bacteria, their bodies stimulate 
production of an immune response, resulting in increasing 
numbers of immune cells to combat infection. CRP sharply 
increased to activate the complement system to defend against 
infection. As shown in Figure  6E, white blood cells (WBCs), 
monocytes (MONs), lymphocytes (LYs), and neutrophils (NEs) 
were still in the active phase, and the secretion of CRP was 
also excessively increased in mice treated with PBS, indicating 
that mice were still in an infected response state. In contrast, 
immune cells and CRP in mice treated with CuCs recovered to 
nearly the same level as healthy mice (Figure 6E), suggesting 
that CuCs effectively resisted sepsis in response to MRSA infec-
tion. There was no obvious change in RBC count, hematocrit 
(HCT) level, platelet (PLT) count, and hemoglobin (HGB) index 
(Figure 6E; Figure S26, Supporting Information), further indi-
cating the excellent blood biocompatibility of CuCs. Sepsis in 
murine models is associated with acute organ damage, espe-
cially in the lung and liver.[35] After treatment, mice were 
euthanized with isoflurane, and their lungs and livers were 
harvested. As shown in Figures  6D,F, both CuCs and vanco-
mycin reduced MRSA burden in lungs and livers. Images in 
Figure  6G demonstrated obvious gross inflammation in the 
injured lungs and livers in PBS-treated mice (white arrow). In 
contrast, the morphology of the lungs and livers in CuCs and 
vancomycin-treated mice restored to the same as that in healthy 
group, further demonstrating that CuCs reversed systemic 
MRSA infection in mice. Subsequently, we performed histo-
pathological evaluation of mouse organs. H&E staining dem-
onstrated thickened respiratory membranes, increased effusion 
in the alveoli, and thrombosis in the liver accompanied by con-
gestion in MRSA-infected mice treated with PBS (Figure 6H). 
In contrast, CuCs and vancomycin alleviated liver and lung 
damage caused by MRSA infection (Figure 6H). These results 
were consistent with the results of organ morphology observed 
in Figure  6G. Our results clearly demonstrated that systemic 
sepsis caused by MRSA severely damaged mouse organs and 
led to their death (Figure 6). Fortunately, CuCs effectively alle-
viated this process with the same therapeutic efficacy as van-
comycin. Considering its good biosafety and superior bacterial 
killing ability, CuCs may have the potential to be further devel-
oped into clinical antibacterial agents to resist sepsis.
In addition, some potential limitations still existed in this 
work. First, although intraperitoneal injection is often used in 
animal studies during the early stages of drug evaluation, it is 
rarely seen clinically. Future research should consider that the 
biosafety and therapeutic efficacy of CuCs when treating mice 
by intraperitoneal and intravenous injection. Second, due to 
the lack of commercial antibodies to GR protein in bacteria, 
we could not employ protein separation technology to obtain 
GR-CuCs or GR-Cu complexes in intracellular bacteria for 
structural identification. Third, the network pathway of bacte-
rial death is intricate. GR may not be the only target of CuCs, 
and other antioxidant enzymes may also bind to CuCs. There-
fore, the development of strategies employing other methods to 
identify protein complexes in bacteria could further clarify the 
antibacterial mechanism of the metal clusters and improve the 
possibility of their potential clinical application.
3. Conclusion
In summary, we prepared CuCs utilizing an artificially 
designed theanine peptide for efficient treatment of MDR 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2008720
 16163028, 2021, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202008720 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2008720  (11 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
Figure 6.  CuCs rescued mice suffering from MRSA sepsis. A) Schematic diagram of sepsis infected with MRSA and treated with CuCs. Mice were 
sacrificed at 48 h for evaluation. B) Survival rate of MRSA-infected mice during the treatment of CuCs and vancomycin (VA). C) Variation in body 
weight in mice after treatment with CuCs and vancomycin. D) Relative MRSA colonies in 1 g lung tissue of MRSA-infected mice after treatment. 
E) Changes of white blood cell (WBC), monocyte (MON), lymphocyte (LY), neutrophil (NE), C-reactive protein (CRP), and red blood cell (RBC) counts 
in MRSA-infected mice after treatment. F) Relative MRSA colonies in 1 g liver tissue of MRSA-infected mice after treatment. G) Representative images 
of organs in healthy and MRSA-infected mice after treatment. H) H&E staining of lungs and livers in different groups after treatment. Data are pre-
sented as the mean ± s.d., **p < 0.01.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2008720
 16163028, 2021, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202008720 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2008720  (12 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
bacterial infection. CuCs exhibited good biocompatibility and 
broad-spectrum antibacterial activity against both gram-positive 
and gram-negative bacteria, including MRSA. Moreover, CuCs 
played profound anti-infective roles by destroying the struc-
ture of the bacteria and inhibiting GR enzymatic activity. Cru-
cially, destruction of the bacterial wall and membrane structure 
results in the low possibility of developing bacterial resistance 
compared to the clinical drugs MO and vancomycin. Notably, 
the melatonin intervention study in MRSA and E. coli validated 
that bacterial death was a consequence rather than the cause of 
the ROS burst. Hence, we can conclude that CuCs regulate the 
ratio of GSH/GSSG by inhibiting GR enzyme activity, subse-
quently leading to a burst of ROS. The burst of ROS could not 
only attack biomacromolecule, but also accelerated the rupture 
of bacterial wall and eventually led to the death of bacteria.
In addition, in vivo experiments demonstrated that CuCs 
significantly rescued skin wound infections and sepsis in mice 
caused by MRSA, which had the same therapeutic efficacy as 
MO and the first-line clinical anchored anti-MRSA drug vanco-
mycin. With further development and optimization, CuCs may 
have great potential to combat MDR bacterial infections.
4. Experimental Section
Materials: The peptide (H2N-CCYXXXXX-COOH, X represents 
theanine) was synthesized by a solid-phase method using Fmoc 
chemistry 
(Ontores 
Biotechnologies 
Co., 
Ltd, 
Purity: 
98%). 
Copper sulfate (CuSO4), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), nitric acid (HNO3, 
MOS grade), and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2, MOS grade) were obtained 
from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. TMB, an ROS assay kit, LB 
broth, melatonin, and granulated agar, were obtained from the Beyotime 
Institute of Biotechnology, China. 16HBE, HUVEC, and NIH/3T3 cell 
lines were purchased from the Cancer Institute and Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences. Cell culture media and phosphate buffer 
solution (PBS) were purchased from HyClone, USA. Fetal bovine serum 
(FBS) and trypsin-EDTA were purchased from Gibco, USA. Reduced GSH 
assay kit, GR, GR assay kit, IL-6, and TNF-α antibody were obtained from 
Abcam. Milli-Q grade water (18.2 MΩ) was used to prepare solutions 
throughout the experiments.
Bacterial Strains: The five bacterial strains used in this study 
were obtained from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC). The 
MRSA (ATCC 33591), S. aureus strain (ATCC25923) and S. epidermidis 
(ATCC12228) were used as representative gram-positive bacteria. The 
E. coli (ATCC 25922) and P. aeruginosa (ATCC 10145) were used as 
representative gram-negative bacteria.
Synthesis of CuCs: Briefly, theanine peptide aqueous solution 
(2.5  mg mL−1, 2  mL) was prepared in a 5  mL vial under vigorous 
stirring (1000 rpm) at 50 °C. Then, NaOH aqueous solution was used 
to adjust the pH to 10. Next, 60 µL of 25 mm CuSO4 aqueous solution 
was added dropwise into the peptide aqueous solution. Subsequently, 
NaOH aqueous solution (200  µL, 1 m) was slowly added dropwise to 
the reaction vessel. Then, the reactant was protected from light during 
vigorous stirring for 6 h at 50 °C.
Characterization of CuCs: The fluorescence spectrogram was 
acquired using a spectrofluorophotometer (F-7000, Hitachi, Japan) at 
a scanning speed of 600  nm  min−1. The excitation and emission slits 
were 10 nm × 10 nm. The CuCs aqueous solution was diluted in water 
at appropriate concentrations, and the ultraviolet–visible spectrogram of 
the CuCs was recorded by a UV-1800 spectrophotometer (SHIMADZU, 
Japan). XPS was performed using an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer 
(ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo, USA). The infrared spectrogram was 
recorded by an infrared spectrometer (Nicolet IS10, Thermo, USA). The 
zeta potential was measured by the NanoPlus DLS nano particle size 
and zeta potential analyzer (90Plus Zeta, NanoBrook, USA).
Determination of CuCs Concentration: After CuCs were purified, the 
concentration was analyzed by an ICP-MS analysis system (Thermo X 
Series 2, USA). Briefly, 3 mL nitric acid was added into a volume of 10 µL 
CuCs for 12 h. Then, the mixed solution was evaporated to 0.1–0.2 mL 
in a BHW-09C Heating Block system at 140  °C for 2.5 h. Next, the 
solution was diluted to the appropriate concentration by 2% HNO3. A 
concentration of 20 ppb indium in a 2% HNO3 solution was used as 
an internal standard. A series of different copper standard aqueous 
solutions (1, 5, 10, 25, and 50  ng mL−1) were quantified to build a 
standard curve. The standard curve is shown in Figure S27, Supporting 
Information, and the linear regression coefficient was 0.9998. Each 
experiment was repeated three times.
In Vitro Cytotoxicity Assay of CuCs: Cell toxicity of CuCs was evaluated 
by CCK-8 assay. Briefly, 16HBE, HUVEC, and NIH/3T3 cells were seeded 
into 96-well plate at a density of 4000 cells per well, respectively. Then, 
the 96-well plates were placed in the incubator for 12 h at 37  °C and 
5% CO2. Next, supernatant was removed, and different doses of CuCs 
dissolved in medium (0, 50, 100, 200, and 400 µm Cu) were added to the 
cells and incubated for 48 h (n = 5). After 48 h, a 10% volume of CCK-8 
solution in serum-free medium was introduced into the cells. After 
incubation for 20 min at 37 °C, the absorption value (λ450 nm) of each 
well was measured using a microplate reader (SpectraMax M2). The 
cytotoxicity of different treatment groups was calculated by the following 
equation:
Cell viability
As
Ab
Ac
Ab
%
100
=
−
−
×
	
(1)
where As  =   absorbance value of the CuCs treatment group; 
Ac  =  absorbance value of the control group without CuCs; and 
Ab = absorbance value of the blank group without cells and CuCs.
In Vitro Antibacterial Experiments: The antibacterial activity of CuCs 
was determined by the growth curve method and agar plate dilution 
method. For the growth curve method, bacterial suspensions (MRSA, 
S. aureus, S. epidermidis, E. coli, and P. aeruginosa) were diluted to the 
appropriate concentration (1 × 103 to 1 × 104 CFU mL−1) in LB medium 
and then mixed together with different doses of CuCs. Then, a solution 
(200 µL) of the bacterial diluent containing CuCs (0, 50, 100, and 200 µm 
Cu) was added to a 96-well plate (n = 6). Next, the plate was placed in 
shaking incubator (220 rpm) and incubated at 37 °C. Then, OD values 
were monitored at a wavelength of 600  nm (OD600) every 1 h by a 
microplate reader (SpectraMax M2) until the growth curve reached the 
plateau stage. For the agar plate method, after incubating with CuCs at 
different concentrations (0, 50, 100, and 200 µm) for 2 h, the bacterial 
suspension was diluted 106-fold in LB, and 50 µL of the bacterial diluent 
(S. epidermidis, E. coli, and P. aeruginosa) was applied to the LB agar 
plate. S. aureus and MRSA were applied to agar plates with mannitol 
salt. Then, the agar plates were cultured at 37 °C for different times (18 h 
for E. coli and P. aeruginosa, 36 h for MRSA and S. aureus, and 48 h for 
S. epidermidis).
Live/Dead Bacterial Fluorescent Imaging: The toxicity of CuCs to 
bacterial cells was evaluated using visualized dead and live fluorescent 
imaging. The viability of bacterial cells was determined using PI and 
SYTO9 dye (Invitrogen Detection Technologies, USA). SYTO9 with 
green fluorescence stains both dead and live bacteria, while PI with red 
fluorescence only stains dead bacteria. Briefly, cells were treated with 
different concentrations of CuCs (0, 50, 100, and 200  µm) for 2 h at 
37  °C. Next, bacterial cells were washed with PBS and incubated with 
PI and SYTO9 dye away from light for 20 min at 37 °C. Then, bacterial 
cells were washed with PBS three times, and 8 µL of cells in PBS were 
dropped onto a glass slide. Finally, cells were imaged using confocal 
laser scanning microscopy (CLSM, LSM880, Zeiss, Germany).
In Situ Detection of ROS Production: ROS production in bacterial 
cells treated with CuCs was detected using the ROS indicator DCFH-DA 
dye (Beyotime, China). Briefly, bacteria were treated with different 
concentrations of CuCs (0, 50, 100, and 200  µm) for 2 h at 37  °C. 
Then, bacterial cells were washed with PBS, followed by the addition 
of DCFH-DA at a final concentration of 10 µm and incubated at 37 °C 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2008720
 16163028, 2021, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202008720 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2008720  (13 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
for 30  min. Next, cells were centrifuged at 3600  rpm for 5  min and 
washed with PBS three times. Then, intracellular ROS levels in cells were 
examined and imaged using CLSM. The excitation wavelength was set 
at 488 nm.
Morphology Observation of Bacteria: After treatment with different 
doses of CuCs (0, 50, 100, and 200 µm) for 2 h at 37 °C, bacterial cell 
suspensions were centrifuged at 3600 rpm for 5 min and washed with 
PBS three times. Next, bacterial cells were fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde 
at room temperature for 2 h. After being washed with PBS, bacterial 
cells were dehydrated by sequential treatment with 50%, 70%, 80%, 
90%, 95% and 100% ethanol for 10  min each. Then, a drop of 5  µL 
dehydrated bacterial cell suspension was added on a silica wafer and air-
dried. Finally, the morphology of the samples were observed using SEM 
(Regulus 8100, Hitachi, Japan).
High-Angle Annular Dark Field Scanning Transmission Electron 
Microscopy Analysis of the Intracellular Distribution of Cu: High-angle 
annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-
STEM) was employed to analyze the morphology of bacteria and the 
mapping of Cu elements within bacteria. After treatment with CuCs 
(200 µm for 2 h at 37 °C), MRSA and E. coli cells were thoroughly washed 
with PBS. Then, cells were fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde overnight 
before being postfixed with a mixture of 1% osmium tetroxide and 
potassium ferricyanide for 2 h at 4 °C. Next, cell pellets were dehydrated 
by sequential treatment with 50%, 70%, 80%, 90%, 95% and 100% 
ethanol for 10 min each and infiltrated with Spurr’s resin (Sigma-Aldrich, 
USA) overnight at 4  °C. Resin pellets were cut into ultrathin sections 
using an ultramicrotome. After dyeing in acetate glaze for 30 min and 
then dyeing with lead citrate for 5 min, TEM examination and element 
mapping of the bacterial cell ultrathin sections were performed in a JEM-
1200EX at 200 kV and an FEI Talos F200X at 200 kV.
Detection of Nucleic Acid Leakage: When the bacterial membrane 
was damaged, the RNA and DNA released from the cytoplasm could 
be measured. After treatment with CuCs, the bacterial cell suspensions 
were filtered with a 0.22  µm syringe filter membrane (Millipore, USA) 
to cut off bacterial cells. Then, a volume of 200  µL filtrate was added 
into 96-well plate (n = 6). Next, the OD260nm value was recorded by a 
microplate reader (SpectraMax M2).
Detection of K+ Out-Diffusion from Bacteria: After treatment with 
different doses of CuCs in LB (0, 50, 100, and 200 µm) for 2 h at 37 °C, 
the bacterial cell suspensions were filtered using a 0.22 µm syringe filter 
membrane. Then, quantification of K+ in the LB filtrate was performed 
by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES; 
ICAP 6300, Thermo, USA). The negative control group was the newly 
prepared LB medium. The calibration curve is presented in Figure 
S28, Supporting Information, and the linear regression coefficient was 
0.99989. The measurement was repeated three times for each sample.
Detection of Genomic DNA: After treatment with CuCs (200 µm for 
2 h), the genomic DNA of bacteria was extracted by using genomic 
DNA extraction kit (Beyotime). The concentration of genomic DNA was 
determined by detecting the absorbance at λ260 nm using a microplate 
reader. Then, samples were loaded onto the 1% native agarose gel with 
GelRed and electrophoresed at 120 V for 30 min. Finally, samples were 
visualized using a UVP GelDoc-It Ts imaging system.
Melatonin Rescue Experiment: Bacteria (106 CFU) were added 
to a 96-well plate (n  = 6). Then, mixtures of CuCs and melatonin 
were introduced into bacterial cells to final concentrations of 0 and 
0, 50 and 0, 100 and 0, 200 and 0, 200 and 0.5, 200 and 1.0, 200 
and 2.0  µm, respectively. Next, the plate was placed in the shaking 
incubator (220 rpm) and incubated at 37 °C for 2 h. Then, OD values 
at a wavelength of 600 nm (OD600) were recorded. For ROS detection, 
DCFH-DA was introduced into cells at a final concentration of 10 µm and 
incubated for another 30 min. Then, fluorescence intensity was recorded 
by a microplate reader under 488 nm excitation.
Detection of GSH Levels in Bacteria: Bacterial cells (106 CFU) 
were added to 96-well plates, and CuCs were added to cells at final 
concentrations of 0, 50, 100, and 200  µm. Then, bacterial cells were 
placed in a shaking incubator (220  rpm) and incubated at 37  °C for 
2 h. Next, bacterial cells were centrifuged at 3600  rpm for 5  min and 
washed with PBS three times. Finally, GSH levels were quantified using a 
reduced GSH assay kit purchased from Abcam.
Detection of Enzymatic Activity of GR: For in vitro enzyme activity 
detection, GR and CuCs at different concentrations (0, 2, 5, 10 and 
20 µm) were mixed together and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. Then the 
enzymatic activity of GR was quantified using a GR assay kit purchased 
from Abcam. For in vivo enzymatic activity identification, bacterial cells 
were incubated with CuCs of different concentrations (0, 20, 50, 100 and 
200 µm) at 37 °C for 2 h. Then, total protein was extracted from bacteria, 
and the enzymatic activity of GR was identified using a GR assay kit.
Quantification of Cu Bound to GR Protein: GR (1 mg mL−1) and CuCs 
of different concentrations (0, 2, 5, 10 and 20 µm)) were mixed together 
and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. Then, GR-CuCs complexes were purified 
in a Millipore centrifugal filter (Ultracel-30K) at a centrifugal force of 
7500  g to isolate CuCs by adding PBS. The mixture was collected in 
the inner tube. Then, the product was digested with nitric acid and 
quantified by ICP-MS.
In Vivo MRSA-Infected Skin Model: All animal experiments were 
conducted in compliance with the Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
guidelines and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and 
Ethics Committee (Approval No. SCXK2014-0004). Female ICR mice 
(6 weeks old) were purchased from Shanghai SLAC Laboratory Animal 
Co., Ltd, China. A MRSA-infected skin model was created by inoculating 
ICR mice under isoflurane anesthesia. The dorsal hair of mice was 
removed using a razor and depilatory cream. Then, a full-thickness 
≈8 mm diameter skin wound was created as described in previous study 
under sterile conditions.[36] After the wound was created, all mice were 
kept in separate cages and raised at 25 °C in a 12 h light/dark cycle. A 
suspension of MRSA (20 µL, 106 CFUs) was inoculated into each wound. 
The negative control group (Un-inf) was not inoculated with MRSA.
Treatment Regimens: 12 h postinfection with MRSA, mice were 
randomly divided into four groups (n = 6) and treated with 50 µL PBS, 
CuCs (1 or 2 mg kg−1) and theanine peptide (2 mg kg−1) on days 1 and 
3. MO was applied to MRSA-infected skin wounds every day. Afterwards, 
the healing process of MRSA-infected wounds and weight changes of 
mice were monitored throughout the entire treatment period (9 days). 
Wound size was measured using vernier calipers, and macroscopic 
images were captured using a camera. After treatment, wound tissue 
was dissected and placed in an equal volume of sterile PBS. Bacterial 
cell burden on each mouse wound was evaluated by the LB-agar plate 
dilution method.
Histopathology Assessment: At the end of treatment, histological 
analysis of MRSA-infected wound tissue was performed. Wound 
tissue and organs from mice in different groups were fixed in formalin 
solution and embedded in paraffin. Then, tissues were sectioned into 
3 µm thick sections. Next, tissue sections were dewaxed in xylene and 
gradient dehydration using a graded series of ethanol. Finally, sections 
were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and scanned using 
Nanozoomer S60 (Hamamatsu, Japan). For IHC, wound tissue sections 
were labeled using TNF-α and IL-6 antibodies. Briefly, after dewaxing 
and rehydration, sections were washed with PBS and incubated with 
3% H2O2 for 15  min to deplete endogenous peroxide. Next, sections 
were placed in sodium citrate buffer and heated in a microwave at 
140  °C for 3  min and then cooled for 15  min at room temperature. 
Next, sections were blocked with goat serum at 37 °C for 20 min and 
subsequently incubated with primary antibodies against TNF-α and 
IL-6 at 4 °C overnight. The next day, sections were extensively washed 
with PBS, and HRP-conjugated secondary antibody was added for 1 h 
at room temperature, followed by the addition of DAB solution for 
10  min at room temperature. Finally, sections were counterstained 
with hematoxylin and scanned using a Nanozoomer S60. Images were 
analyzed by NDP.view 2 software.
In Vivo MRSA-Infected Sepsis Rescue: An MRSA-infected sepsis model 
was created by intraperitoneally injecting 1 × 107 CFU MRSA into female 
ICR mice (6 weeks old) (n = 10). Immediately after MRSA infection, mice 
were intraperitoneally injected with a dose of 5 mg kg−1 CuCs or PBS. A 
second dose (5 mg kg−1) was given 12 h later. The dose of vancomycin 
was 3 mg kg−1 administered intravenously after MRSA infection.[3e] The 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2008720
 16163028, 2021, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202008720 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2008720  (14 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
mortality of mice was recorded every hour, and weight changes in living 
mice were also recorded. At the end of the treatment, mice were given 
anesthesia, and their livers, lungs, and blood were collected. Routine 
blood tests and blood biochemistry were performed according to 
standardized methods. Liver and lung were imaged before fixation in 4% 
formalin. Part of the liver and lung tissues were fixed and turned into 
paraffin sections. Next, sections were dewaxed and stained with H&E. 
The rest of the lung and liver tissues were weighed separately. One gram 
of these tissues was cut into pieces and homogenized in 10  mL cold 
sterile PBS. Then, the homogenate was diluted ten times in PBS, and 
10 µL of bacterial diluent was applied to the mannitol salt agar plate. The 
number of MRSA colonies on mannitol salt agar plates was imaged and 
statistically analyzed after incubation for 36 h at 37 °C.
Toxicity Level Determination by Hemolysis Assay: The toxicity level of 
CuCs with respect to hemolytic potential was assessed according to the 
standard protocol.[37] The volume of 1 mL blood sample was collected 
from a healthy ICR mouse and added into a centrifuge tube coated 
with 3.8% sodium citrate. Then, the blood sample was centrifuged at 
1500 rpm for 5 min, and cells were collected. Next, cells were washed 
three times with PBS and diluted to 10  mL with PBS. To perform a 
hemolysis assay, 0.5  mL diluted RBC suspension solution was mixed 
with 0.5  mL of different concentrations of CuCs (0, 100, 200, and 
400 µm in PBS). The positive control was set to mix 0.5 mL deionized 
water and 0.5 mL of diluted RBC suspension. An equal amount of PBS 
was used as a blank. Then, these samples were incubated at 37  °C. 
After centrifugation at 1500 rpm for 5 min, absorbance of free HGB at 
570 nm in the supernatants was measured using a microplate reader to 
calculate the hemolysis percentage. The relative hemolysis percentage 
was calculated as follows:
Hemolysis
Abs Sample
Blank
Abs Positive control
Blank
%
(
)
(
)
100
=
−
−
×
	
(2)
Statistical Analysis: All data in graphs were plotted using the mean 
± s.d. Statistical analysis was conducted using SPSS software (SPSS 
version 22.0, USA). Comparisons between groups were analyzed using 
one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA), and differences were statistically 
significant when *p < 0.05.
Supporting Information
Supporting Information is available from the Wiley Online Library or 
from the author.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by programs from the National Natural 
Science Foundation of China (32001013), the Innovative Research Team 
in the Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (CAAS-ASTIP-2016-TRI) 
and the Central Institute Basic Scientific Research Expenses Foundation 
(Y2020XK19). The authors thank Fangming Chen for the histopathology 
analysis (Zhejiang Chinese Medical University).
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Data Availability Statement
Data sharing is not applicable to this article as no new data were created 
or analyzed in this study.
Keywords
antibacterial mechanism, copper clusters, glutathione reductase, 
multidrug-resistant bacteria, reactive oxygen species
Received: October 13, 2020
Revised: January 15, 2021
Published online: January 29, 2021
[1]	 a) L. S. J. Roope, R. D. Smith, K. B. Pouwels, J. Buchanan, L. Abel, 
P.  Eibich, C. C.  Butler, P. S.  Tan, A. S.  Walker, J. V.  Robotham, 
S.  Wordsworth, Science 2019, 364, eaau4679; b) C.  Nathan, Nat. 
Rev. Microbiol. 2020, 18, 259; c) S. H. E.  Kaufmann, A.  Dorhoi, 
R. S.  Hotchkiss, R.  Bartenschlager, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 
2018, 17, 35; d) L. J. V. Piddock, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2017, 15, 639; 
e) C. T. Kahrstrom, Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2015, 13, 126; f) A. Mullard, 
Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery 2016, 15, 375.
[2]	 a) L. J. Shallcross, S. J. Howard, T. Fowler, S. C. Davies, Philos. Trans. R. 
Soc., B 2015, 370, 20140082; b) C. J. N. Willyard, Nature 2017, 543, 15.
[3]	 a) A. C.  Leonard, L. E.  Petrie, G.  Cox, ACS Infect. Dis. 2019, 5, 
1668; b) R. C.  Moellering Jr., J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 2012, 67, 
4; c) D. P. R.  Troeman, D.  Van Hout, J.  Kluytmans, J. Antimicrob. 
Chemother. 2019, 74, 281; d) N. A.  Turner, B. K.  Sharma-Kuinkel, 
S. A.  Maskarinec, E. M.  Eichenberger, P. P.  Shah, M.  Carugati, 
T. L.  Holland, V. G.  FowlerJr., Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2019, 17, 203; 
e) S. Hussain, J. Joo, J. Kang, B. Kim, G. B. Braun, Z. G. She, D. Kim, 
A. P.  Mann, T.  Molder, T.  Teesalu, S.  Carnazza, S.  Guglielmino, 
M. J. Sailor, E. Ruoslahti, Nat. Biomed. Eng. 2018, 2, 95.
[4]	 D. L. Paterson, P. N. A. Harris, Lancet Infect. Dis. 2016, 16, 132.
[5]	 a) N. A.  Turner, B. K.  Sharma-Kuinkel, S. A.  Maskarinec, 
E. M.  Eichenberger, P. P.  Shah, M.  Carugati, T. L.  Holland, 
V. G. FowlerJr., Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2019, 17, 203; b) D. L. Paterson, 
P. N. A. Harris, Lancet Infect. Dis. 2016, 16, 132.
[6]	 J. R. Porter, Bacteriol. Rev. 1976, 40, 260.
[7]	 S. Medici, M. Peana, V. M. Nurchi, M. A. Zoroddu, J. Med. Chem. 
2019, 62, 5923.
[8]	 H. H. A. Dollwet, J. R. J. Sorenson, Trace Elem. Med. 1985, 2, 80.
[9]	 a) B.  Peng, X.  Zhang, D.  Aarts, R. P. A.  Dullens, Nat. Nano-
technol. 2018, 13, 478; b) P. C. Naha, Y. Liu, G. Hwang, Y. Huang, 
S.  Gubara, V.  Jonnakuti, A.  Simon-Soro, D.  Kim, L.  Gao, H.  Koo, 
D. P. Cormode, ACS Nano 2019, 13, 4960; c) J. Xi, G. Wei, L. An, 
Z. Xu, Z. Xu, L. Fan, L. Gao, Nano Lett. 2019, 19, 7645; d) Y. Wang, 
Y.  Yang, Y.  Shi, H.  Song, C.  Yu, Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 1904106; 
e) P. Makvandi, C. y. Wang, E. N. Zare, A. Borzacchiello, L. n. Niu, 
F. R. Tay, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2020, 30, 1910021.
[10]	 a) K. Zheng, K. Li, T. H. Chang, J. Xie, P. Y. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2019, 29, 1904603; b) K. Zheng, M. I. Setyawati, D. T. Leong, J. Xie, 
ACS Nano 2017, 11, 6904; c) C. Wang, Y. Wang, L. Zhang, R. J. Miron, 
J. Liang, M. Shi, W. Mo, S. Zheng, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater. 
2018, 30, 1804023.
[11]	 a) A.  Ivanova, K.  Ivanova, A.  Tied, T.  Heinze, T.  Tzanov, Adv. 
Funct. Mater. 2020, 30, 2001284; b) X. Xie, T. Sun, J. Xue, Z. Miao, 
X. Yan, W. Fang, Q. Li, R. Tang, Y. Lu, L. Tang, Z. Zha, T. He, Adv. 
Funct. Mater. 2020, 30, 2000511; c) V. V. Singh, B. Jurado-Sánchez, 
S.  Sattayasamitsathit, J.  Orozco, J.  Li, M.  Galarnyk, Y.  Fedorak, 
J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2015, 25, 2147.
[12]	 K. B.  Ayaz Ahmed, T.  Raman, V.  Anbazhagan, RSC Adv. 2016, 6, 
44415.
[13]	 a) C. Kaweeteerawa, C. H. Chang, K. R. Roy, R. Liu, R. Li, D. Toso, 
H. Fischer, A. Ivask, Z. Ji, J. I. Zink, Z. H. Zhou, G. F. Chanfreau, 
D.  Telesca, Y.  Cohen, P. A.  Holden, A. E.  Nel, H. A.  Godwin, 
ACS Nano 2015, 9, 7215; b) J.  Guo, S. H.  Gao, J.  Lu, P. L.  Bond, 
W. Verstraete, Z. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 22298.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2008720
 16163028, 2021, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202008720 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

www.afm-journal.de
www.advancedsciencenews.com
2008720  (15 of 15)
© 2021 Wiley-VCH GmbH
[14]	 a) J.  Shan, X.  Li, K.  Yang, W.  Xiu, Q.  Wen, Y.  Zhang, L.  Yuwen, 
L.  Weng, Z.  Teng, L.  Wang, ACS Nano 2019, 13, 13797; b) Y.  Li, 
X.  Liu, L.  Tan, Z.  Cui, D.  Jing, X.  Yang, Y.  Liang, Z.  Li, S.  Zhu, 
Y.  Zheng, K. W. K.  Yeung, D.  Zheng, X.  Wang, S.  Wu, Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 2019, 29, 1900946.
[15]	 a) S. Zhu, L. Li, Z. Gu, C. Chen, Y. Zhao, Small 2020, 16, 2000980; 
b) L. Laloux, D. Kastrati, S. Cambier, A. C. Gutleb, Y. J. Schneider, 
Small 2020, 16, 1907687; c) A.  Boey, H. K.  Ho, Small 2020, 16, 
2000153.
[16]	 a) D. Hu, Z. Sheng, S. Fang, Y. Wang, D. Gao, P. Zhang, P. Gong, 
Y.  Ma, L.  Cai, Theranostics 2014, 4, 142; b) X. D.  Zhang, Z.  Luo, 
J. Chen, X. Shen, S. Song, Y. Sun, S. Fan, F. Fan, D. T. Leong, J. Xie, 
Adv. Mater. 2014, 26, 4565; c) Y.  Zheng, L.  Lai, W.  Liu, H.  Jiang, 
X.  Wang, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci. 2017, 242, 1; d) L.  Shang, 
S. Dong, G. U. Nienhaus, Nano Today 2011, 6, 401; e) I. Chakraborty, 
T. Pradeep, Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 8208.
[17]	 Y. Zhao, Z. He, R. Wang, P. Cai, X. Zhang, Q. Yuan, J. Zhang, F. Gao, 
X. Gao, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol. 2019, 15, 2281.
[18]	 a) X. Liu, D. Astruc, Coord. Chem. Rev. 2018, 359, 112; b) P. Chen, 
A.  Periasamy, S.  Harroun, W.  Wu, H.  Chang, Coord. Chem. Rev. 
2016, 320–321, 129.
[19]	 A. La Torre, V. Iovino, F. Caradonia, Phytopathol. Mediterr. 2018, 57, 201.
[20]	 W. F. Lai, W. T. Wong, A. L. Rogach, Adv. Mater. 2020, 32, 1906872.
[21]	 L. Gao, Y. Zhang, L. Zhao, W. Niu, Y. Tang, F. Gao, P. Cai, Q. Yuan, 
X. Wang, H. Jiang, X. Gao, Sci. Adv. 2020, 6, eabb1421.
[22]	 J. Xi, G. Wei, L. An, Z. Xu, Z. Xu, L. Fan, L. Gao, Nano Lett. 2019, 19, 
7645.
[23]	 a) J. Yan, M. M. Ralston, X. Meng, K. D. Bongiovanni, A. L. Jones, 
R. Benndorf, L. D. Nelin, W. Joshua Frazier, L. K. Rogers, C. V. Smith, 
Y. Liu, Free Radical Biol. Med. 2013, 61, 320; b) P. L. Lam, R. S. Wong, 
K. H.  Lam, L. K.  Hung, M. M.  Wong, L. H.  Yung, Y. W.  Ho, 
W. Y. Wong, D. K. Hau, R. Gambari, C. H. Chui, Chem. Biol. Interact. 
2020, 320, 109023.
[24]	 J.  Noh, B.  Kwon, E.  Han, M.  Park, W.  Yang, W.  Cho, W.  Yoo, 
G. Khang, D. Lee, Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 6907.
[25]	 a) N.  Couto, J.  Wood, J.  Barber, Free Radical Biol. Med. 2016, 
95, 27; b) J.  Mora-Lorca, B.  Saenz-Narciso, C.  Gaffney, 
F. 
Naranjo-Galindo, 
J. 
Pedrajas, 
D. 
Guerrero-Gomez, 
A. 
Dobrzynska, 
P. 
Askjaer, 
N. 
Szewczyk, 
J. 
Cabello, 
A. Miranda-Vizuete, Free Radical Biol. Med. 2016, 96, 446.
[26]	 a) X. Zhang, R. Liu, Q. Shu, Q. Yuan, G. Xing, X. Gao, Small 2018, 
14, 1703684; b) Y.  Wang, Y.  Cui, R.  Liu, Y.  Wei, X.  Jiang, H.  Zhu, 
L. Gao, Y. Zhao, Z. Chai, X. Gao, Chem. Commun. 2013, 49, 10724; 
c) X.  Zhang, R.  Liu, Q.  Yuan, F.  Gao, J.  Li, Y.  Zhang, Y.  Zhao, 
Z. Chai, L. Gao, X. Gao, ACS Nano 2018, 12, 11139.
[27]	 Y.  Raju, P.  Krishnamurthi, P.  Paulose, P.  Manoharan, Nanoscale 
2017, 9, 17963.
[28]	 a) Z.  Luo, V.  Nachammai, B.  Zhang, N.  Yan, D. T.  Leong, 
D. E. Jiang, J. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 10577; b) C. Zhang, 
L. Gao, Q. Yuan, L. Zhao, W. Niu, P. Cai, J. Li, X. Han, Z. He, F. Gao, 
Y.  Wang, H.  Jiang, Z.  Chai, X.  Gao, Small 2020, 16, e2002044; 
c) Q. Yao, X. Yuan, V. Fung, Y. Yu, D. T. Leong, D. E. Jiang, J. Xie, 
Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 927.
[29]	 a) N.  Vilar-Vidal, J.  Rivas, M.  López-Quintela, ACS Catal. 2012, 
2, 1693; b) J.  Oliver-Meseguer, L.  Liu, S.  Garcia-Garcia, C.  Canos-
Gimenez, I.  Dominguez, R.  Gavara, A.  Domenech-Carbo, 
P. Concepcion, A. Leyva-Perez, A. Corma, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 
137, 3894.
[30]	 a) J.  Henderson, S.  Zimmerman, A.  Crofts, J.  Boll, L.  Kuhns, 
C.  Herrera, M.  Trent, Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 2016, 70, 255; 
b) A. Konovalova, D. Kahne, T. Silhavy, Annu. Rev. Microbiol. 2017, 
71, 539.
[31]	 A.  Vaccaro, Y.  Kaplan Dor, K.  Nambara, E. A.  Pollina, C.  Lin, 
M. E. Greenberg, D. Rogulja, Cell 2020, 181, 1307.
[32]	 N. K.  Pandey, L.  Chudal, J.  Phan, L.  Lin, O.  Johnson, M.  Xing, 
J. P. Liu, H. Li, X. Huang, Y. Shu, W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. B 2019, 
7, 6630.
[33]	 a) N.  Mallick, J. Plant Physiol. 2004, 161, 591; b) B.  Braha, 
H. Tintemann, G. Krauss, J. Ehrman, F. Barlocher, G. J. Krauss, Bio-
Metals 2007, 20, 93; c) V. V. Husak, N. M. Mosiichuk, O. I. Kubrak, 
T. M.  Matviishyn, J. M.  Storey, K. B.  Storey, V. I.  Lushchak, Fish 
Physiol. Biochem. 2018, 44, 841.
[34]	 a) K. Murakami, R. Tsubouchi, M. Fukayama, M. Yoshino, BioMetals 
2014, 27, 551; b) J. Gutierrez-Correa, A. O. Stoppani, Free Radic. Res. 
1997, 27, 543.
[35]	 R. Lei, J. Hou, Q. Chen, W. Yuan, B. Cheng, Y. Sun, Y. Jin, L. Ge, 
S. A.  Ben-Sasson, J.  Chen, H.  Wang, W.  Lu, X.  Fang, ACS Nano 
2018, 12, 5284.
[36]	 S. Yan, S. Chen, X. Gou, J. Yang, J. An, X. Jin, Y. W. Yang, L. Chen, 
H. Gao, Adv. Funct. Mater. 2019, 29, 1904683.
[37]	 a) M.  Das, U.  Goswami, R.  Kandimalla, S.  Kalita, S. S.  Ghosh, 
A. Chattopadhyay, ACS Appl. Bio Mater. 2019, 2, 5434; b) Y. Wang, 
C. Xu, Y. Chang, L. Zhao, K. Zhang, Y. Zhao, F. Gao, X. Gao, ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2017, 9, 28959.
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021, 31, 2008720
 16163028, 2021, 14, Downloaded from https://advanced.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/adfm.202008720 by Xun Yuan - QINGDAO UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE & TECH , Wiley Online Library on [23/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License