ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Lysosomal membrane damage repair and 
acidification impairment restoration triggered 
by smart lipid nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s 
disease treatment
Jiaqing Yin a,d,† , Wei Lv b,† , Wei Zhao a,d , Zhenwei Ding a,d , Fei Zhu a ,
Hongli Liu a,d , Shengnan Li a,d , Xiang Cao a,d , Linfeng Liu a,d , 
Kefan Song a,d , Yue Gong a,d , Jiangna Xu a,d , Yuqin Chen a,d , 
Zhiyuan Zhang c,* , Xiangming Fang a,* , Hongliang Xin a,d,*
a The Affiliated Wuxi People’s Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Wuxi People’s Hospital, Wuxi Medical 
Center of Nanjing Medical University; Pharmacy School of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China 
b Department of Pharmacy, The Affiliated Jiangyin Clinical College of Xuzhou Medical University, Jiangyin 
214400, China
c School of Basic Medical Sciences Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China
d Jiangsu Province Innovation Center for Brain-Inspired Intelligence Technology, Nanjing 210000, China
Received 2 October 2025; received in revised form 1 February 2026; accepted 18 February 2026
KEY WORDS
Alzheimer’s disease; 
Lysosomal repair; 
Lysosomal dysfunction; 
Smart lipid nanoparticles; 
Blood—brain barrier; 
GSK-3; 
Neuroinflammation; 
Neurodegeneration
Abstract Alzheimer’s disease (AD), characterized by amyloid (Aß) deposition in neurons, is the most 
serious neurodegenerative disorder, but lacks effective therapeutic drugs in the clinic. Impaired neuronal 
lysosomal function drives the pathological accumulation of intracellular Aß. Targeted rehabilitation of 
lysosomal dysfunction may offer a potential strategy to restore neuronal homeostasis and mitigate AD 
progression. In this study, we developed a brain-targeted smart lipid nanoparticle (A-PSL@7BIO) to 
repair lysosomal membrane damage and restore impaired acidification in the brain for AD therapy. 
The system was composed of Angiopep-2 peptide-conjugated lipid nanoparticles, which were loaded 
with a Glycogen synthase kinase-3ß (GSK-3ß) inhibitor 7-bromoindirubin-3ʹ-oxime (7BIO) and incorpo-
rated with dipalmitoyl-phosphatidylserine (DPPS) and a reactive oxygen species (ROS) responsive phos-
pholipid. Through Angiopep-2-mediated blood—brain barrier (BBB) transcytosis, the smart lipid
*Corresponding authors.
E-mail addresses: xhl@njmu.edu.cn (Hongliang Xin), Xiangming_fang@njmu.edu.cn (Xiangming Fang), zzy@njmu.edu.cn (Zhiyuan Zhang).
† These authors made equal contributions to this work.
Peer review under the responsibility of Chinese Pharmaceutical Association and Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences.
+ MODEL
Please cite this article as: Yin Jiaqing et al., Lysosomal membrane damage repair and acidification impairment restoration triggered by smart lipid 
nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease treatment, Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2026.06.036
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2026.06.036
2211-3835 ª 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Chinese Pharmaceutical Association and Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Chinese Pharmaceutical Association
Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B
www.elsevier.com/locate/apsb
www.sciencedirect.com
Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B xxxx;xxx(xxx):xxx

nanoparticles could enhance brain biodistribution with subsequent neuronal internalization. Pathologi-
cally elevated intracellular ROS levels in AD could induce stimulus-responsive payload release, wherein 
7BIO selectively inhibited aberrant GSK-3ß hyperphosphorylation to restore the physiological acidic 
lysosomal environment and DPPS structurally repaired compromised lysosomal membranes, synergisti-
cally addressing dual aspects of lysosomal pathology. This smart lipid nanoparticles synergistically 
restored physiological lysosomal homeostasis, reversed neuronal dysfunction, and ameliorated cognitive 
deficits in AD models, indicating that A-PSL@7BIO could be used as a potential nanomedicine for AD 
therapy.
ª 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of Chinese Pharmaceutical Association and 
Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences. This is an open access article under 
the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
1. Introduction
AD, a neurodegenerative disorder, is characterized by dementia 
symptoms such as memory loss, aphasia, and executive dysfunc-
tion. Currently, over 50 million people worldwide are affected by 
AD, with projections suggesting that this number will rise to 139 
million by 2050 1,2 . In recent years, drugs and therapeutic strate-
gies for the treatment of AD have been continually reported and 
developed. The introduction of lecanemab and other antibodies 
has garnered significant attention 3,4 , while the investigation and 
application of novel strategies such as proteolysis-targeting chi-
meras (PROTACs) offer a promising new direction for the efficient 
clearance of pathogenic proteins 5,6 . Recently, mounting evidence 
has demonstrated that lysosomal dysfunction in neurons is a 
critical factor in AD pathogenesis 7 . Characterized by their elab-
orate dendritic and axonal cytoplasmic extensions, neurons exhibit 
a profound reliance on the lysosomal‒autophagic system 8 . As 
essential intracellular organelles enriched with diverse hydrolases, 
lysosomes are responsible for degrading key biological macro-
molecules, including proteins, nucleic acids, and polysaccharides. 
By executing these catabolic activities, lysosomes orchestrate 
fundamental physiological processes, including autophagy, anti-
gen presentation, and cellular component recycling, to establish 
intracellular homeostasis 9,10 . Lysosomal dysfunction, triggered by 
disruption of membrane integrity or impairment of the acidic 
intraluminal environment, plays a critical role in the pathogenesis
of cellular senescence and associated age-related pathologies 11,12 .
At present, extensive researches have focused on repairing 
damaged lysosomes, including enzyme replacement therapy with 
recombinant enzyme drugs such as Lanzyme and pharmacological 
chaperones like NB-DNJ for exogenous supplementation of defi-
cient enzymes and promotion of their proper folding 13,14 . Direct 
repair of damaged lysosomes via the ESCRT III complex pathway 
(activating cellular autophagy) and clearance of abnormal com-
ponents through PROTACs-mediated targeted protein degradation 
also restore intracellular homeostasis 6,15—17 . It has been demon-
strated that diminished v-ATPase activity in neurons impairs 
lysosomal acidification, thereby inhibiting the degradation of toxic 
Aß and amyloid precursor protein (APP), which contributes to the 
pathogenesis of AD 18 . Compromised lysosomal degradation 
further exacerbates the accumulation of amyloid precursor protein 
ß-carboxy-terminal fragments (APP-ßCTFs) and Aß due to the 
continuous delivery of damaged proteins by autophagosomes to 
dysfunctional lysosomes. Elevated lysosomal membrane perme-
ability (LMP) triggers the cytoplasmic leakage of hydrolytic en-
zymes, disrupting cellular homeostasis. This cascade culminates 
in neuronal apoptosis, the release of intracellular components, and
the extracellular deposition of Aß plaques, collectively driving
AD pathology progression 19,20. 
GSK-3, a multifunctional serine/threonine kinase comprising α
and ß isoforms, is ubiquitously expressed in mammalian cells 21 .
Its hyperactivation is strongly implicated in the pathogenesis and 
progression of AD. Specifically, hyperphosphorylated GSK-3ß 
reduces lysosomal v-ATPase acetylation, a posttranslational 
modification essential for its proton-pumping activity 22 . This 
disrupts H + transfer into lysosomes, altering their acidic envi-
ronment and causing lysosomal acidification failure 23 . Pharma-
cological inhibition of GSK-3ß restores v-ATPase-dependent 
proton transport on lysosomal membranes 24 . Notably, 7BIO, a 
selective GSK-3ß inhibitor, rescued lysosomal acidification by 
targeting its hyperphosphorylated state and mitigated Aß-induced 
neuroinflammation and synaptic dysfunction through the sup-
pression of GSK-3ß, thereby conferring neuroprotective ef-
fects 25,26 . However, strategies for the targeted delivery of 7BIO 
into the AD brain require further study.
However, restoring lysosomal acidity requires concomitant 
preservation of lysosomal membrane integrity. Otherwise, proton 
leakage through damaged membranes negates the benefits of v-
ATPase-driven acidification, thereby obstructing functional 
recovery 27—29 . Under stress conditions, lysosomal membranes 
sustain damage during physiological turnover, disrupting cellular 
proteostasis. Healthy cells counteract this by activating the 
phosphoinositide-initiated membrane tethering and lipid transport 
(PITT) membrane repair pathway. Lysosomal membrane damage 
induces Ca 2+ efflux, which recruits phosphatidylinositol 4-kinase 
type 2A (PI4K2A). Mechanistically, PI4K2A generates phospha-
tidylinositol 4-phosphate (PI4P) on lysosomal surfaces, facili-
tating the recruitment of oxysterol-binding protein (ORP) family 
members and establishing endoplasmic reticulum (ER)—lysosome 
contact sites. Through these contact sites, phosphatidylserine (PS) 
is transported from the ER to the lysosomal membrane via the 
lipid transfer channel established by activated ORP9/10/11. It acts 
on the carboxyl terminus of autophagy-related 2A (ATG2A-ΔCT) 
to regulate autophagy-related 2A (ATG2A) membrane binding, 
thereby promoting lysosomal membrane repair. Therefore, as a 
key downstream effector molecule of the PITT pathway, PS 
contributes to the structural and functional restoration of the 
lysosomal membrane 29 . Under conditions of lysosomal membrane 
self-repair mechanism dysfunction in AD, the transport of exog-
enous PS to the lysosomal membrane may trigger a highly effi-
cacious program to repair damaged membranes and reconstitute 
their complete structure. Furthermore, PS can act as a pivotal 
scaffold material for liposomal drug delivery systems. However, 
PS-targeted delivery strategies for lysosomal repair have not been
2 
Jiaqing Yin et al.
+ MODEL
Please cite this article as: Yin Jiaqing et al., Lysosomal membrane damage repair and acidification impairment restoration triggered by smart lipid 
nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease treatment, Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2026.06.036

reported yet, which constitutes a major critical gap in this research 
field.
BBB acts as a critical protective interface, selectively blocking 
the entry of neurotoxic plasma components, circulating blood cells, 
and pathogens into the central nervous system (CNS) 30 . However, 
the tight endothelial junctions of the BBB create significant chal-
lenges for conventional drug delivery, which results in limited trans-
BBB permeability. Angiopep-2 (ANG2), a 19-amino acid peptide 
derived from the Kunitz domain of aprotinin, serves as a high-
affinity ligand for low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein
1 (LRP-1) expressed on brain capillary endothelial cells 31 . This 
molecular interaction enables ANG2-functionalized drug delivery 
systems to hijack the endogenous LRP-1-mediated transcytosis 
pathway, thereby facilitating BBB penetration. Compared with 
nontargeted systems, ANG2-conjugated drug delivery systems
enhance the accumulation of payloads in the brain 3- to 5-fold 32,33 .
In complex AD pathology, excessive ROS critically impair 
neuronal function by disrupting synaptic activity, impairing
neurotransmission, and exacerbating neuroinflammation 34,35 .
Thioketal (TK)-based ROS-responsive drug delivery systems un-
dergo selective cleavage upon pathological ROS stimulation. This 
redox stimulus-responsive release profile enables spatiotemporal
control of drug delivery at targeted loci 36. 
Given the key mechanisms of lysosomal membrane damage and 
acidification impairment in AD pathogenesis, we developed a smart 
liposomal system (A-PSL@7BIO) loaded with 7BIO and inserted 
with DPPS for targeted repair of dysfunctional lysosomes. As 
shown in Scheme 1, the system uses surface-attached ANG2 to 
target LRP-1 on cerebral capillary endothelial cells, facilitating 
BBB transmigration into the brain. Upon entering AD neurons, ROS 
stimulation alters liposome curvature, inducing localized mem-
brane destabilization and drug release. The combination of 7BIO 
and DPPS is critical for efficient lysosomal repair. Specifically, 
released 7BIO inhibits GSK-3ß overactivation, enhancing v-
ATPase proton-pump activity and restoring lysosomal acidification; 
however, unrepaired damaged lysosomal membranes may cause H + 
leakage from v-ATPase, impairing maintenance of the lysosomal 
acidic microenvironment. Concurrently, PS released from DPPS
Scheme 1 
Schematic illustration of A-PSL@7BIO construction and diagram of its anti-AD effect.
Smart lipid nanoparticles restore lysosomal function in AD
3
+ MODEL
Please cite this article as: Yin Jiaqing et al., Lysosomal membrane damage repair and acidification impairment restoration triggered by smart lipid 
nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease treatment, Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2026.06.036

activates ATG2-mediated lipid transfer pathways to reconstruct 
damaged lysosomal membranes by reducing permeability. This 
integrated strategy forms a sequential therapeutic cascade: restored 
lysosomal proton gradients and membrane integrity reactivate 
proteolytic enzymes, enhancing degradation of pathogenic Aß and 
APP/ßCTF aggregates and ultimately preserving neuronal viability 
by reducing cytotoxic Aß plaque accumulation. Collectively, the 
rational design of A-PSL@7BIO, integrating targeted delivery and 
7BIO-DPPS synergy, enables effective lysosomal repair in AD, 
offering a promising strategy for addressing lysosomal dysfunction 
in AD pathogenesis.
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
7BIO was obtained from MedChemExpress (Shanghai, China). 
DPPS was obtained from Shanxi Beioubio Co., Ltd. (Shanxi, 
China). The ANG2 peptide was obtained from Hubei Qiangyao 
Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Hubei, China). The polymer DSPE-TK-
PEG 2000 was obtained from Nanjing Yuanju Pharmaceutical 
Technology Co., Ltd. (Nanjing, China). Triton X-100, RIPA lysis 
solution, Lyso-Tracker Red, Ad-mCherry-GFP-LC3B (Cat. No. 
C3011), Rabbit anti-CTSD mAb (Cat. No. AF1645), Dylight 405-
labeled Goat Anti-Rabbit IgG(H + L) (Cat. No. A0605), and ECL 
reagents were obtained from Beyotime Biotechnology (Shanghai, 
China). PVDF membranes (0.2 μm) were obtained from Millipore 
(Merck Chemicals Technology (Shanghai) Co., Ltd., Shanghai, 
China). LysoSensor TM Yellow/Blue (Cat. No. L22460) dextran was 
obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Shanghai, China). MES 
(Cat. No. M163014), Leu-Leu methyl ester hydromide (LLOMe) 
(Cat. No. L464355) was obtained from Aladdin (Shanghai, China). 
Rabbit anti-GAPDH Ab and goat anti-rabbit IgG (H + L) HRP (Cat. 
No. S0001) were obtained from Affinity Biosciences (Changzhou, 
China). Rabbit anti-ß-Amyloid (1—40) mAb (Cat. No. A24949), 
rabbit anti-phospho-GSK-3ß mAb (Cat. No. AP1088), rabbit anti-
CatD mAb (Cat. No. A19680), rabbit anti-ATP6V0A1 mAb (Cat. 
No. A15258) were obtained from ABclonal Technology Co., Ltd. 
(Wuhan, China). Rabbit anti-ATG2A PolyAb (Cat. No. 23226-1-
AP) was obtained from Proteintech (Wuhan, China).
2.2. Methods
2.2.1. Synthesis of DSPE-PEG2000-ANG2
ANG2 (20 mg) and Maleimide-PEG 2000 -DSPE (8 mg, 3/1 M ratio) 
were dissolved in 1 mL of PBS and 1 mL of DMF respectively, then 
added to 8 mL PBS. The reaction proceeded under continuous ni-
trogen purging (24 h, inert atmosphere). DSPE-PEG2000-ANG2 
conjugate was purified via dialysis (MWCO 3.5 kDa cutoff) fol-
lowed by lyophilization. Structural confirmation was characterized 
through 1 H NMR and FT-IR spectroscopy.
2.2.2. Preparation and characterization of A-PSL@7BIO 
Liposomal A-PSL@7BIO was prepared by the thin film dispersion 
method. Briefly, 8 mg Hydrogenated Soybean Phosphotidylcholine 
(HSPC), 1 mg DSPE-PEG 2000 -ANG2, 3 mg DSPE-TK-PEG 2000 ,
1 mg DPPS, 2 mg cholesterol (Chol) were dissolved with 15 mL of 
methanol—chloroform (1/6, v/v). Dissolve 1 mg of 7BIO in 1 mL of 
methanol—chloroform (1/6, v/v) to obtain a 1 mg/mL 7BIO/meth-
anol—chloroform stock solution for further use. The prepared lipid 
solution and the drug stock solution were mixed at a 40/1 (w/w) ratio
and formed a uniform film at 45 ◦ C using a rotary evaporator. The 
film was then ultrasonically dissolved in 5 mL of ultrapure water 
preheated to 45 ◦ C for 10 min. After being hydrated by water-bath 
heating at 55 ◦ C for 2 h, the A-PSL@7BIO liposomes were obtained 
through repeated extrusion by a liposome extruder with 800, 400, 
and 200 nm, respectively. The excess drugs were removed by 
centrifugation. Various fluorescent-labeled A-PSL@7BIO were 
assembled using the same method by adding various fluorescent 
probes (Coumarin 6, Cy7) to the solvent.
The loading capacity (LC) and encapsulation efficiency (EE) 
were detected by Ultraviolet (UV) and visible spectra. The ζ- 
potential and particle size of liposomes were measured by dy-
namic light scattering (DLS), and the morphology of liposomes 
was observed with transmission electron microscopy (TEM) after 
uranium acetate negative staining.
2.2.3. Storage and serum stability of A-PSL@7BIO 
A-PSL@7BIO was suspended in PBS alone or PBS containing 10% 
FBS, and stored at 4 ◦ C. The colloidal stability was evaluated 
through monitoring of hydrodynamic diameter distribution via DLS 
measurements at standardized intervals over a 7-day storage period.
2.2.4. In vitro release of A-PSL@7BIO
The in vitro release profiles of A-PSL@7BIO liposomes were 
investigated by dialysis method using PBS (pH 7.4) and 1 mmol/L 
hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) containing PBS (pH 7.4) as release 
medium at 37 ◦ C, respectively. Aliquots (1 mL) were collected 
from the release medium at predetermined intervals (0—48 h), and 
the medium was replenished with equivalent fresh medium to 
maintain sink conditions. 7BIO concentration was determined 
through UV—Vis spectrophotometric detection (λ Z 500 nm) 
using a validated calibration curve (R 2 > 0.99).
2.2.5. In vitro cellular cytotoxicity assay
The cytotoxic profile of A-PSL@7BIO was evaluated using a Cell 
Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8) assay. SH-SY5Y cells were plated in 96-
well microplates at a density of 5000 cells/well in 200 μL complete 
medium and allowed to adhere for 24 h. Cells were subsequently 
exposed to escalating concentrations of A-PSL@7BIO (1, 2, 4, 8, 
12, 16 and 20 μg/mL) for 24 h. Then, 100 μL 10% CCK-8 reagent 
(v/v) was supplemented into the culture medium for an additional
2 h incubation. Cellular viability was quantified by the absorbance 
detected with a microplate reader at 475 nm.
2.2.6. In vitro cellular uptake assay
The bEnd.3 cells (1 × 10 4 cells) with logarithmic growth were 
inoculated onto slide of 12-well plates. Cellular systems were then 
exposed to either Coumarin 6 labeled A-PSL@7BIO or 
PSL@7BIO for 4 h. After triple PBS rinsing to remove free 
nanoparticles, nuclei were stained with DAPI and imaged by 
fluorescence microscope.
2.2.7. In vitro neuroprotective effects of A-PSL@7BIO
The SH-SY5Y cell viability was measured with the CCK-8 assay. 
SH-SY5Y cells were implanted into 96-well plates (1 × 10 4 cells/ 
well) and cultured for 24 h. Then, 5 μmol/L Aß 1—42 was added to 
stimulate the cells. Meanwhile, A-PSL@7BIO at 2, 4, 8, 12, 16 and 
20 μg/mL was added for 24 h incubation. And then, 100 μL 10% 
CCK-8 was added to the cells. The absorbance was detected with a 
microplate reader at 475 nm after incubation for another 2 h.
4 
Jiaqing Yin et al.
+ MODEL
Please cite this article as: Yin Jiaqing et al., Lysosomal membrane damage repair and acidification impairment restoration triggered by smart lipid 
nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease treatment, Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2026.06.036

2.2.8. Live/dead assay
Live/Dead Assay further tested the viability of SH-SY5Y cells 
upon Aß 1—42 stimulation. SH-SY5Y neuronal cells were seeded in 
24-well plates at 5 × 10 4 cells/well and cultured for 24 h. Then,
5 μmol/L Aß 1—42 was added to stimulate the cells. Meanwhile, 
A-PSL@7BIO at 4, 8 and 20 μg/mL was added for 24 h incu-
bation. After PBS washing, fluorescence imaging was performed 
using an inverted epifluorescence microscope.
2.2.9. In vitro transwell penetration assay
The trans-endothelial transport capacity of A-PSL@7BIO was 
quantitatively analyzed using a transwell model simulating the 
in vitro blood—brain barrier. Briefly, the bEnd.3 cells with a 
density of 5 × 10 4 /well were planted into the 24-well transwell 
upper chamber with a pore diameter of 1 μm and cultured for 2 
weeks. Then, the medium was replaced every two days. After the 
transendothelial electrical resistance (TEER) of cell monolayers 
was higher than 200 Ω‧cm 2 , 200 μL of DMEM medium containing 
Coumarin 6-labeled liposomes was introduced into the upper 
chamber of the Transwell system, while 1000 μL of fresh DMEM 
medium was added to the lower chamber. The fluorescence in-
tensity of the lower chamber sample was measured by a Multiskan 
Mk3 microplate reader (E x : 450 nm, E m : 500 nm).
2.2.10. Investigation of lysosome function
SH-SY5Y cells were inoculated into 12-well plates with cell 
climbing slices and cultured overnight. The cells were transfected 
with mCherry-eGFP-LC3 adenoviral reporter constructs at a mul-
tiplicity of infection (MOI) of 4, followed by 24 h co-incubation. 
Viral particles were subsequently removed through triple PBS 
washes, with transduction efficiency verified via fluorescence mi-
croscopy prior to experimental procedures. After pretreatment with
5 μmol/L Aß 1‒42 for 24 h, SH-SY5Y cells were incubated with 
A-PSL and A-PSL@7BIO, respectively. The slices were rinsed 
with PBS, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, and then co-incubated 
with anti-CTSD antibody (Abcam, 1/300, v/v), followed by the 
fluorescence labeling with Goat anti-rabbit IgG H&L DyLight 405 
(Abcam, 1/200 v/v). The slices were observed under a fluorescence 
microscope for the qualitative evaluation of lysosomal pH.
For the quantitative measurement of lysosomal pH, SH-SY5Y 
cells were incubated with 1 mg/mL Lysosensor Yellow/Blue 
dextran for 24 h at 37 ◦ C after a 24 h pre-incubation with
5 μmol/L Aß 1‒42 and various formulations. The cells were washed 
three times with PBS, trypsinized, and transferred into a black 96-
well microplate. The standard curve was obtained according to the 
protocol established previously. In brief, cells were treated with 
1% penicillin—streptomycin in MES buffer (5 mmol/L NaCl, 
115 mmol/L KCl, 1.3 mmol/L MgSO 4 , 25 mmol/L Mes), with the 
pH adjusted to a range from 3.5 to 5.5. The emission at 440 nm 
and 535 nm with excitation at 355 nm was read by the Multiskan 
Mk3 microplate reader. The ratio of emission, 440/535, was 
calculated and substituted into the standard curve for pH value
determination 37 .
SH-SY5Y cells were seeded into 12-well plates at a density of
5 × 10 4 cells per well and cultured for 24 h. Then, they were 
incubated for 24 h with 5 μmol/L of Aß 1—42 and different formu-
lations. SH-SY5Y cells were co-incubated with DMEM/F12 
serum-free medium containing the Lysotracker-Red fluorescent 
probe (1/20,000, v/v) for 30 min. Subsequently, the 12-well plate 
was placed under a fluorescence microscope to observe the number 
and fluorescence intensity of the lysosomes within the cells.
Lysosomal integrity dynamics were monitored in SH-SY5Y 
cells using a standardized fluorescence recovery protocol. Cells 
cultured in 24-well plates were co-incubated with LysoTracker 
Red (1/20,000, v/v, in serum-free DMEM/F12 medium) for 30 min 
incubation. Following initial fluorescence imaging, cellular sys-
tems were exposed to 1 mmol/L LLOME for 5 min to induce 
lysosomal membrane permeabilization. Then, triple PBS rinsing 
was performed prior to reintroduction of various formulations 
containing LysoTracker Red in fresh serum-free medium. Time-
lapse imaging was conducted at defined intervals: baseline (pre-
treatment), post-LLOME exposure (5 min), and at 1, 5 and 10 min 
post-intervention.
2.2.11. In vivo biodistribution of A-PSL@7BIO
Cy7-labeled A-PSL@7BIO or PSL@7BIO was intravenously 
injected into 6-month-old APP/PS1-21 mice using PBS as a 
negative control. The in vivo imaging system (IVIS) was utilized 
to detect the fluorescence signal in the brain of the mice at 4 and
8 h after injection. The mice were sacrificed 8 h after injection, 
and the main organs including brain, heart, liver, spleen, lung, and 
kidney, were harvested and observed with the imaging system 
IVIS. The semiquantitative analysis of the region of interest (ROI) 
analysis was also measured by IVIS. All animal experiments were 
in accordance with guidelines evaluated and approved by the 
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Nanjing Medical 
University (approval number: 2406047)
2.2.12. Open field test (OFT) experiment
The ANY-maze video-tracking system was used to sequentially 
analyze and record all the behavioral tests. In the OFT, there was a 
square cavity (50 cm × 50 cm × 50 cm), where the central square 
occupied half of the total area and was defined as the inner square, 
while the remaining area was defined as the outer square. Each 
mouse was placed individually in the chamber and allowed to 
move freely for 10 min. The distances traveled and the time spent 
in both the inner and outer squares were recorded.
2.2.13. Morris water maze (MWM) experiment
The cognitive ability of APP/PS1-21 mice was evaluated by the 
MWM on Day 17 after treatment. The MWM consisted of two 
parts, spatial navigation task and probe trial test. In the spatial 
navigation task, mice received a consecutive 5-day training for 
submerged platform seeking. Each mouse received three-time 
repeated training according to the randomly-determined training 
quadrant sequence every day. If the mice successfully found the 
platform in 60 s with a 5 s stay, the searching time was recorded as 
escape latency; otherwise, the cut-off time, 60 s, was taken as 
escape latency, and the mice were manually led for a 10 s dwell on 
the platform as supplementary training. After the spatial naviga-
tion task, the platform was removed, and the probe trial test was 
conducted. The mice were allowed a 60 s free swim, which started 
in the farthest quadrant from the original platform location. The 
swimming trajectories were tracked and analyzed by the ANY 
maze video-track system.
2.2.14. Nissl staining
The paraffin-embedded tissue sections underwent initial process-
ing through sequential deparaffinization and rehydration proced-
ures. Subsequently, the specimens were subjected to the Nissl 
staining protocol implementation. Following chromatic visuali-
zation, the sections were systematically dehydrated using graded 
ethanol solutions and chemically cleared through xylene
Smart lipid nanoparticles restore lysosomal function in AD 
5
+ MODEL
Please cite this article as: Yin Jiaqing et al., Lysosomal membrane damage repair and acidification impairment restoration triggered by smart lipid 
nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease treatment, Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2026.06.036

immersion. Final preparation for microscopic analysis was ach-
ieved by permanent mounting with neutral balsam under stan-
dardized coverslipping conditions.
2.2.15. Western blotting assay
Cell lysate or brain tissue homogenate was harvested as described 
above. Totally 30 μg of proteins was separated by 5%− 12% SDS-
PAGE and transferred to PVDF membranes. The membranes were 
blocked with BSA (5%, m/v) and then incubated with anti-
Amyloid1—40 (1/1000, v/v), anti-CTSD (1/1000, v/v), anti-Zonula 
occludens-1 (1/1000, v/v), anti-Claudin 5 (1/1000), anti-pTBK1 (1/ 
1000, v/v), anti-pIRF3 (1/1000, v/v), anti-STING (1/1000, v/v), anti-
cGAS (1/1000, v/v), and anti-GAPDH (1/5000, v/v) at 4 ◦ C over-
night, followed by HRP-conjugated secondary antibody at room 
temperature for 1 h. The bands were soaked with ECL luminescent 
solution and exposed in the Fully Automated Chemiluminescence 
Image Analysis System (4600 Series, Tanon). The band optical 
density was semi-quantitatively analyzed with ImageJ.
2.2.16. Immunohistochemistry analysis
The brain tissues were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, dehydrated in 
an ascending series of ethanol, cleared in xylene, and then 
embedded in paraffin. The paraffin-embedded brain tissues were 
sectioned into 8 μm coronal slices. The immunohistochemical 
staining was performed on the routine method. Briefly, after xylene 
dewaxing, gradient ethanol hydration, antigen retrieval with citrate 
buffer, and blocking with QuickBloc blocking buffer, the sections 
were further incubated with primary antibody, including anti-ß- 
Amyloid 1‒42 antibody or anti-Phospho-tau antibody, at 4 ◦ C 
overnight, followed by incubation with HRP-conjugated Goat anti-
mouse IgG at 37 ◦ C for 1 h. After being stained with DAB reagent 
and counterstained with hematoxylin solution, the sections were 
dehydrated by ethanol gradients, cleared in xylene, and cover-
slipped with neutral resin. And then, the sections were observed by a 
microscope (DMi8, Leica, Germany), and the percentage area of 
amyloid plaque deposit was quantitatively analyzed by ImageJ 
software.
2.2.17. Statistical analysis
Data are presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD). Statistical 
analysis of differences between the experimental groups was 
performed using multiple Student’s t-tests and one-way ANOVA. 
Differences were considered statistically significant when 
P < 0.05 (Data are presented as mean ± SD; *P < 0.05, 
**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001 vs. indicated).
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Preparation and characterization of A-PSL@7BIO
To enhance the ability of the 7BIO and DPPS codelivery system to 
the AD brain, we modified the 7BIO-loaded and DPPS-containing 
liposomes (PSL@7BIO) with the brain-targeted peptide ANG2. 
First, through the Michael addition reaction between the mal-
eimide group on maleimide-PEG 2000 -DSPE and the sulfhydryl 
group on ANG2, the brain-targeting functional material DSPE-
PEG 2000 -ANG2 was synthesized and characterized by FT-IR 
(Supporting Information Fig. S1A) and 1 H NMR (Fig. S1B). 
These results indicated that DSPE-PEG 2000 -ANG2 was success-
fully synthesized. And then, A-PSL@7BIO was developed 
through adding the DSPE-PEG 2000 -ANG2 polymer during the
preparation by film-dispersion extrusion technique using opti-
mized lipid-to-drug ratios. These results indicated that DSPE-
PEG 2000 -ANG2 was successfully synthesized. A-PSL@7BIO 
was subsequently developed through the addition of the DSPE-
PEG 2000 -ANG2 polymer during preparation via the film-
dispersion extrusion technique with optimized lipid-to-drug ratios.
TEM revealed that PSL@7BIO and A-PSL@7BIO were 
spherical unilamellar liposomes (Fig. 1A), whereas DLS revealed 
an average hydrodynamic diameter of approximately 180 nm in 
aqueous solution (Fig. 1B). These structural features increase their 
potential for drug delivery applications. In terms of surface charge 
properties, A-PSL@7BIO exhibited a greater ζ-potential than did 
PSL@7BIO (Fig. 1C), which may be attributed to the fact that a 
certain amount of charge was shielded upon modification with the 
ANG2 peptide. However, both formulations maintained negative 
surface charges, which minimized nonspecific phagocytosis 
in vivo and increased the nanoparticle circulation time and tar-
geting efficiency 38,39 .
Quantitative analysis of 7BIO within the A-PSL@7BIO 
formulation, along with determination of its EE and drug-LC, was 
performed via UV spectrophotometry. The results demonstrated 
that A-PSL@7BIO achieved an EE of approximately 70.16% and 
an LC of 1.71%, indicating the efficient encapsulation of 7BIO 
within the lipid-based nanoparticle system (Supporting Information 
Table S1). In addition, stability analysis of A-PSL@7BIO demon-
strated that this formulation exhibited favorable stability within the 
study time range (Supporting Information Fig. S2).
The in vitro release profile of A-PSL@7BIO was investigated by 
dialysis. When incubated in a phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) 
solution at pH 7.4 containing 1 mmol/L H 2 O 2 , A-PSL@7BIO 
exhibited an efficient release of approximately 85.49% of the 
encapsulated 7BIO over 12 h. In sharp contrast, when incubated in a 
PBS solution without H 2 O 2 , the release rate of 7BIO from 
A-PSL@7BIO was markedly lower, reaching only approximately 
49.42% (Fig. 1D). These results provide compelling evidence for 
the pronounced ROS-responsive drug release property of A-
PSL@7BIO.
3.2. In vitro neuroprotective efficacy and BBB permeability of 
A-PSL@7BIO
To evaluate the neuronal uptake efficiency of A-PSL@7BIO and 
assess its cytocompatibility in a cellular model, cellular uptake 
and cytotoxicity assays were conducted in SH-SY5Y cells. The 
results revealed that A-PSL@7BIO could be efficiently internal-
ized by neurons (Supporting Information Fig. S3). Simulta-
neously, the results of the CCK-8 cytotoxicity assay demonstrated 
the excellent in vitro biosafety profile of A-PSL@7BIO, with no 
significant cytotoxicity observed at concentrations ranging from 1 
to 20 μg/mL (Supporting Information Fig. S4). These findings 
confirmed the favorable biocompatibility of the formulation for 
neuronal applications.
To investigate the neuroprotective efficacy of A-PSL@7BIO 
on neurons, Live/dead cell viability and CCK-8 assays were per-
formed using SH-SY5Y cells stimulated with Aß. The cells 
exhibited increased propidium iodide (PI) red fluorescence, 
reflecting increased dead cell populations, and decreased calcein-
AM green fluorescence, indicative of viable cell loss. Treatment 
with A-PSL@7BIO effectively attenuated the PI fluorescence in-
tensity, resulting in a reduction in the number of dead cells, 
whereas higher drug concentrations further diminished the red 
fluorescence signals (Fig. 1E and F). The reciprocal modulation of
6 
Jiaqing Yin et al.
+ MODEL
Please cite this article as: Yin Jiaqing et al., Lysosomal membrane damage repair and acidification impairment restoration triggered by smart lipid 
nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease treatment, Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2026.06.036

PI signal attenuation with calcein-AM fluorescence restoration 
across treatment groups provided functional validation of A-
PSL@7BIO’s neuroprotective efficacy. Moreover, A-PSL@7BIO 
demonstrated robust neuroprotective effects, promoting SH-
SY5Y cell survival, as validated by CCK-8 absorbance quantifi-
cation. At 4 μg/mL, SH-SY5Y cells in the A-PSL@7BIO group 
were similar to those in the control group, which demonstrated the 
strong neuroprotective effect of A-PSL@7BIO against Aß- 
induced damage (Fig. 1G).
The ability of A-PSL@7BIO to penetrate the BBB was quanti-
tatively assessed in a bEnd.3 cell monolayer model. Compared with
PSL@7BIO without ANG2 modification, A-PSL@7BIO exhibited 
significantly increased permeability across the cell monolayers at 1,
2 and 4 h post incubation. These results highlighted the essential 
role of ANG2 in facilitating the transport of A-PSL@7BIO across 
the in vitro cell monolayer (Fig. 1H).
3.3. In vitro lysosomal repair ability of A-PSL@7BIO
To authenticate the in vitro efficacy of A-PSL@7BIO in rectifying 
lysosomal acidification impairment, Ad-mCherry-GFP-LC3B 
adenoviral fluorescent probes combined with anti-CTSD
Figure 1 
Characterization of A-PSL@7BIO. (A) Size distribution via DLS and representative TEM image (scale bar Z 200 nm) of 
PSL@7BIO (B) and A-PSL@7BIO. (C) ζ-potentials of PSL@7BIO and A-PSL@7BIO. (D) Cumulative release of 7BIO from A-PSL@7BIO 
under different conditions. (E) Live/dead assay of Aß-stimulated SH-SY5Y cells treated with different formulations (scale bar Z 50 μm). (F) 
Corresponding semi-quantification of Live/dead assay of Aß-stimulated SH-SY5Y cells treated with different formulations. (G) Viability of Aß- 
stimulated SH-SY5Y cells treated with different formulations. (H) Fluorescence intensities of Coumarin 6-labeled PSL@7BIO and A-PSL@7BIO 
in the basal chamber of the transwell at 1 h, 2 h, and 4 h. Data are presented as mean ± SD (n Z 3); ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001 vs. 
indicated; ns, P > 0.05.
Smart lipid nanoparticles restore lysosomal function in AD 
7
+ MODEL
Please cite this article as: Yin Jiaqing et al., Lysosomal membrane damage repair and acidification impairment restoration triggered by smart lipid 
nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease treatment, Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2026.06.036

antibodies were used for co-labeling. The Ad-mCherry-GFP-
LC3B adenoviral fluorescent probe labeled LC3B, a key marker 
of the autophagy pathway, to visualize autophagosomes. Upon cell 
infection, the co-expression of mCherry and GFP renders auto-
phagosomes yellow. In normal cells, autophagosome‒lysosome 
fusion triggers GFP quenching by lysosomal acidity, shifting 
fluorescence to red; in AD, impaired lysosomal acidification 
maintains yellow fluorescence. To identify lysosomes, CTSD, a 
lysosomal marker, is used to stain lysosomes with blue fluores-
cence. Colocalization of Ad-mCherry-GFP-LC3B and anti-CTSD 
antibodies labels autolysosomes: normal autolysosomes display 
purple fluorescence, whereas those with AD-associated acidifica-
tion defects exhibit white fluorescence, enabling differentiation
based on fluorescence color 40—43 .
In the pathological milieu of AD, neuronal lysosomes exhibit 
acidification impairment. The elevated pH of the acidic internal 
environment impairs the normal activation and function of lyso-
somal hydrolases. Previous studies have demonstrated that in-
hibitors of GSK-3ß can effectively restore the pH of the lysosomal 
acidic microenvironment 24 . In the present study, an Aß-induced 
neuronal cell model was established. Co-localization analysis of 
lysosomes in neurons was performed using the adenoviral probe 
Ad-mCherry-eGFP-LC3B and the lysosomal marker CTSD. 
Changes in pH were monitored via alterations in fluorescence 
signals (Fig. 2A) to evaluate lysosomal damage in neurons under 
AD pathological conditions 20 . SH-SY5Y cells co-incubated with 
Aß displayed dysregulated lysosomal acidification; in contrast, the 
empty vector A-PSL exerted a negligible effect on ameliorating 
such acidification disorders. By sharp contrast, A-PSL@7BIO 
significantly alleviated lysosomal acidification in neurons and 
restored their physiological homeostasis (Fig. 2B). Quantitative 
analysis further demonstrated that after coincubation with Aß, the 
intra-lysosomal pH of SH-SY5Y cells increased to approximately 
5.0, whereas A-PSL treatment failed to significantly counteract 
this pH increase. Conversely, A-PSL@7BIO effectively reduced 
the intra-lysosomal pH in neurons, thereby alleviating lysosomal 
acidification defects and restoring it to normophysiological levels 
(Fig. 2C). In summary, these findings confirmed that 
A-PSL@7BIO, with 7BIO acting as the active pharmaceutical 
moiety, effectively restored the lysosomal acidification capacity of 
neurons impaired by AD-related pathological insults.
Additionally, Aß-induced SH-SY5Y cells were used to evaluate 
the alleviation of lysosomal membrane impairment in the patho-
logical milieu of AD. In SH-SY5Y cells co-incubated with Aß, a 
notable reduction in both the fluorescence intensity of lysosomes 
and the number of intracellular lysosomes was detected. Treatment 
with Lipo@7BIO lacking DPPS failed to reverse this decrease in 
fluorescence. In contrast, treatment with A-PSL@7BIO resulted in 
a significant recovery of lysosomal-associated fluorescence in-
tensity in SH-SY5Y cells, accompanied by an increase in lysosomal 
numbers (Fig. 2D and E). Additionally, the lysosomal membrane-
disrupting agent LLOMe was utilized to further assess the prompt 
membrane damage-repair proficiency of A-PSL@7BIO. LLOMe 
was able to induce changes in the membrane permeability of SH-
SY5Y cell lysosomes, and the fluorescence did not recover spon-
taneously within 10 min. Administration of Lipo@7BIO without 
DPPS also did not accelerate the recovery of lysosomal fluorescence 
(Fig. 2F, Supporting Information Fig. S5). In contrast, the 
A-PSL@7BIO group demonstrated rapid lysosomal membrane 
repair ability within 5 min, providing further evidence that 
A-PSL@7BIO could restore lysosomal integrity by quickly fixing 
lysosomal membrane damage.
3.4. Mechanism study of A-PSL@7BIO
Protein expression associated with the repair of lysosomal mem-
brane damage and acidification dysfunction was assessed via 
Western blotting in Aß-stimulated SH-SY5Y cells. In normal cells, 
such damage triggers subsequent upregulation of intracellular 
ATG2, thereby activating the lysosomal self-repair mechanism. 
However, the lysosomal self-repair function triggered by the cell-
autonomous upregulation of ATG2 fails in the pathological condi-
tions of AD. Therefore, actively upregulating ATG2 through 
exogenous PS to promote the initiation of this repair pathway is a 
critical strategy 29 . In this study, exogenously supplemented DPPS 
was found to rapidly repair lysosomal membrane damage induced 
by the lysosomotropic pore-forming agent LLOMe and restore 
lysosomal function to a certain extent (Fig. 2G, Supporting Infor-
mation Figs. S6—S8). Therefore, we investigated whether the 
DPPS-containing nanocarrier A-PSL@7BIO upregulated the pro-
tein expression of ATG2. The results revealed obvious upregulation 
of ATG2 in the A-PSL@7BIO group compared with that in the 
DPPS-free formulation (Aß and 7BIO) group and were comparable 
with those in the PS and PSL@7BIO groups (Fig. 2G and H).
Moreover, in AD pathological conditions, where neuronal ly-
sosomes exhibit acidification dysfunction, increasing v-ATPase 
activity in lysosomes via the inhibition of abnormally phosphor-
ylated GSK-3ß has been shown to effectively restore their acidic 
microenvironment 18,20,44 . We therefore investigated whether 
A-PSL@7BIO could suppress GSK-3ß expression. It was shown 
that it potently inhibited the abnormal phosphorylation of GSK-3ß 
under AD pathological conditions, thereby increasing v-ATPase 
activity and restoring normal metabolic processing of lysosomal 
pro-cathepsin D (CatD) to its active mature form mCatD form 
within lysosomes (Fig. 2G and H), which indicated a significant 
restoration of the acidic milieu in lysosomes 18 . These collective 
findings demonstrated that A-PSL@7BIO restored lysosomal ho-
meostasis by regulating GSK-3ß phosphorylation and ATG2 
expression, with interactions between GSK-3ß, v-ATPase, and 
ATG2 being essential for maintaining normal lysosomal function.
3.5. In vivo biodistribution of A-PSL@7BIO
To authenticate the in vivo biodistribution profile and cerebral 
tropism of A-PSL@7BIO, APP/PS1-21 mice were administered a 
Cy7 fluorescent probe labeled with A-PSL@7BIO or PSL@7BIO 
via intravenous injection through the tail vein. At 4 h and 8 h 
postadministration, the fluorescence intensities from the murine 
cerebral regions were monitored by a small animal in vivo fluo-
rescence imaging system. Both qualitative and semiquantitative 
evaluations of in vivo cerebral fluorescence revealed that at 
diverse time intervals, the fluorescence intensities within the ce-
rebral compartments of the A-PSL@7BIO group were clearly 
greater than those within the cerebral compartments of the 
PSL@7BIO group (Fig. 3A and B). Ex vivo organ fluorescence 
data at 8 h and semiquantitative cerebral analysis further 
corroborated the enhanced cerebral fluorescence in the 
A-PSL@7BIO group (Fig. 3C—E). To observe the hippocampal 
tropism of A-PSL@7BIO, Dil-loaded PSL@7BIO and 
A-PSL@7BIO were intravenously injected into APP/PS1-21 mice 
via the tail vein, and the fluorescence intensity in the hippocampal 
region of the mice was observed. The results demonstrated that 
A-PSL@7BIO was efficiently accumulated in the hippocampal 
region (Fig. 3C—F and G). In summary, A-PSL@7BIO exhibited 
remarkable brain-targeting ability and can be effectively
8 
Jiaqing Yin et al.
+ MODEL
Please cite this article as: Yin Jiaqing et al., Lysosomal membrane damage repair and acidification impairment restoration triggered by smart lipid 
nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease treatment, Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2026.06.036

Figure 2 
In vitro lysosomal repair ability and mechanism of A-PSL@7BIO. (A) Schematic diagram for distinguishing normal and 
acidification-impaired lysosomes via mCherry-eGFP-LC3B/CTSD co-localization. (B) Representative immunostaining images of lysosomes in 
Aß-stimulated SH-SY5Y cells incubated with different formulations (scale bar Z 50 μm). (C) Lysosomal pH of Aß-stimulated SH-SY5Y cells 
treated with different formulations. (D) Representative images of lysosomes in Aß-stimulated SH-SY5Y cells treated with different formulations 
(scale bar Z 20 μm). (E) Relative fluorescence intensity of lysosomes in Aß-stimulated SH-SY5Y cells treated with different formulation. (F) 
Representative immunostaining images of lysosomes in Aß-stimulated SH-SY5Y cells treated with LLOMe and different formulations (scale 
bar Z 20 μm). (G) Western blotting detection of the ß-Amyloid, ATG2A, V0a1, pGSK-3ß, CatD, mCatD, and GAPDH proteins in Aß-stimulated 
SH-SY5Y cells treated with different formulations. (H) Corresponding semi-quantification of western blotting detection of the ß-Amyloid, 
ATG2A, V0a1, pGSK-3ß, CatD, mCatD, and GAPDH proteins in Aß-stimulated SH-SY5Y cells treated with different formulation. Data are 
presented as mean ± SD (n Z 3); *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001 vs. indicated; ns, P > 0.05.
Smart lipid nanoparticles restore lysosomal function in AD 
9
+ MODEL
Please cite this article as: Yin Jiaqing et al., Lysosomal membrane damage repair and acidification impairment restoration triggered by smart lipid 
nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease treatment, Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2026.06.036

Figure 3 
The in vivo targeting efficacy of A-PSL@7BIO. (A) IVIS imaging (B) and corresponding semi-quantification of fluorescence of APP/ 
PS1-21 mice that received intravenous injection of the Cy7 fluorescent probe labeled A-PSL@7BIO or PSL@7BIO at 4 h and 8 h. (C) Ex vivo 
imaging of the major tissues (D) and brain pieces of APP/PS1-21 mice that were intravenously injected with PBS or the Cy7 fluorescent probe 
labeled A-PSL@7BIO or PSL@7BIO after 8 h. (E) Corresponding semi-quantification of fluorescence in ex vivo sacrificed tissues after intra-
venous injection of PBS, PSL@7BIO, or A-PSL@7BIO. (F) Representative immunofluorescence images of NeuN, Dil, and DAPI staining in the 
hippocampus of APP/PS1-21 mice after treatment with different formulations (scale bar Z 500 μm). (G) Relative fluorescence intensity of Dil in 
the hippocampus of APP/PS1-21 mice after treatment with different formulations. Data are presented as mean ± SD (n Z 3); *P < 0.05, 
**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001 vs. indicated; ns, P > 0.05.
10 
Jiaqing Yin et al.
+ MODEL
Please cite this article as: Yin Jiaqing et al., Lysosomal membrane damage repair and acidification impairment restoration triggered by smart lipid 
nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease treatment, Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2026.06.036

accumulated in the hippocampus. Its ability to traverse the BBB 
might be mediated by the modification of ANG2.
3.6. Rescue of spatial memory impairment in APP/PS1-21 mice 
by A-PSL@7BIO
To further validate the ability of A-PSL@7BIO to improve the 
cognitive and memory capabilities of APP/PS1-21 mice, the 
OFT and the MWM test were conducted in this study (Fig. 4A). 
The OFT was utilized to evaluate the spontaneous locomotor
activity and exploratory aptitude of mice within a novel milieu. 
Compared with WT mice, APP/PS1-21 mice exhibited a greater 
ability to traverse the margins of the experimental chamber and 
accrue significantly greater distances and durations in the pe-
ripheral squares. Subsequent to A-PSL@7BIO treatment, the 
distances traveled and durations spent by the mice in the central 
squares 
increased 
substantially 
(Fig. 
4B—D). 
These 
findings suggest that A-PSL@7BIO treatment notably 
restored the capacity of AD model mice to explore novel 
environments.
Figure 4 
Rescue of spatial memory impairment in AP/PS1-21 mice by A-PSL@7BIO. (A) Schematic diagram of the experimental procedure 
of the behavioral experiments. (B) Representative moving paths, (C) quantitative analysis of time, (D) and distance of APP/PS1-21 mice treated 
with different formulations spent in the inner squares in the OFT. (E) Latency of each group in the hidden platform test. (F) Swimming speed of 
each group in the probe trial. (G) Percentage time each group spent in the platform quadrant in the probe trial. (H) Percentage distance each group 
spent in the platform quadrant in the probe trial. (I) Crossing times over the platform of each group in the probe trial. (J) Representative moving 
path map of each group in the probe trial. Data are presented as mean ± SD (n Z 7); *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01and ****P < 0.0001 vs. indicated.
Smart lipid nanoparticles restore lysosomal function in AD 
11
+ MODEL
Please cite this article as: Yin Jiaqing et al., Lysosomal membrane damage repair and acidification impairment restoration triggered by smart lipid 
nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease treatment, Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2026.06.036

The MWM test was implemented to evaluate the learning, 
memory, and cognitive capabilities of AD mice. This experimental 
approach hinges on the inherent aversion of mice to water and 
their natural inclination to seek out a concealed platform sub-
merged in water. By capitalizing on this characteristic, the ca-
pacity of A-PSL@7BIO to ameliorate spatial memory deficits and 
cognitive impairments in APP/PS1-21 mice were evaluated. 
During the initial five-day training, the mice were induced to 
locate an underwater concealed platform, and the escape latency 
of each platform was meticulously recorded. As training unfolded, 
WT mice presented the strongest learning ability, with a marked 
reduction in escape latency. In contrast, APP/PS1-21 mice pre-
sented markedly longer latencies and severely impaired spatial 
memory, and no latency reduction was observed. These findings 
indicated that APP/PS1-21 mice presented significant learning and 
memory deficits. After treatment, the latency in the A-PSL@7BIO 
group was significantly reduced, with notable differences 
observed between the A-PSL@7BIO and PSL@7BIO groups 
(Fig. 4E). On the sixth day of the experiment, the submerged 
platform was withdrawn. The swimming paths, speeds, percentage 
of distance traveled and time spent in the platform’s previous 
quadrant and the former platform area crossing times within 60 s 
were recorded. The absence of significant disparities in swimming 
speed across all groups implied comparable motor capabilities 
(Fig. 4F). In terms of quantitative metrics, compared with WT 
mice, APP/PS1-21 mice demonstrated significantly reduced per-
formance in spatial memory tasks. Specifically, APP/PS1-21 mice 
exhibited notably lower percentages of time (approximately 17%) 
and movement distance (approximately 18%) in the platform-
containing quadrant, whereas WT mice presented 46% and 
40%, respectively, in these parameters. Notably, after treatment 
with A-PSL@7BIO, these percentages reached 46% and 38%, 
which closely aligned with the performance levels of the WT 
group (46% and 40%, respectively) (Fig. 4G and H). The mean 
number of platform-crossing events for the A-PSL@7BIO group 
was 3.42, which was significantly different from that of the AD 
group (Fig. 4I).
An examination of the swimming path maps indicated that the 
WT mice predominantly swam within the target quadrant, sug-
gesting unimpaired learning and memory functions that enabled 
them to accurately identify and reach the target area. In contrast, AD 
mice swam haphazardly along the perimeter of the pool, a charac-
teristic manifestation of impaired spatial memory and cognitive 
skills. Compared with saline treatment, treatment with 7BIO or PS 
did not substantially improve the ability of the mice to seek the 
platform, with no marked difference. Mice in the PSL@7BIO group 
were able to swim toward the former platform location after a brief 
exploration of the pool, suggesting a partial restoration of spatial 
memory. Owing to its superior brain-targeting ability and ability to 
penetrate the BBB, A-PSL@7BIO-treated mice swam rapidly to-
ward the platform upon entering the water, with their swimming 
paths concentrated in the target quadrant (Fig. 4J), demonstrating 
the efficacy of A-PSL@7BIO in enhancing learning capacity and 
alleviating memory deficits in APP/PS1-21 mice. The nest-building 
results further supported the cognitive benefits of A-PSL@7BIO, 
with improved nest-building performance in APP/PS1-21 mice 
(Supporting Information Fig. S9). Collectively, these findings 
indicate the significant therapeutic potential of A-PSL@7BIO in 
addressing AD-related cognitive impairments.
3.7. Evaluation of the in vivo neuroprotective effect of A-
PSL@7BIO
The neuroprotective effect of A-PSL@7BIO on neurons was eval-
uated via Nissl staining and immunofluorescence. Nissl bodies, 
which reflect neuronal activity and functional integrity, enabled the 
morphological evaluation of the effects of A-PSL@7BIO on 
neuronal cell bodies through Nissl staining. Damaged neuronal cell 
bodies appeared dark-colored and atrophied, with interneuronal 
gaps, whereas normal neurons were light blue stained and arranged 
in parallel. Compared with the saline group, the A-PSL@7BIO 
group presented significantly neater arrangements and lighter 
staining of Nissl bodies in the dentate gyrus (DG), Cornu Ammonis
1 (CA1), Cornu Ammonis 2 (CA2), and Cornu Ammonis 3 (CA3) 
regions of the hippocampus and cerebral cortex (Fig. 5A—D). These 
results indicate that A-PSL@7BIO effectively restored neuronal 
structure and physiologic function. To further validate the neuro-
protective effect and assess the Aß clearance capacity, immuno-
staining for Aß and neuronal NeuN in mouse brain slices was 
performed to explore the dual effects of A-PSL@7BIO in preser-
ving neuronal integrity and reducing the amyloid burden. In the 
hippocampal and cortical regions, A-PSL@7BIO treatment 
reduced extracellular Aß deposition. Moreover, compared with the 
saline group, the A-PSL@7BIO group presented markedly greater 
neuron counts and fluorescence intensities (Fig. 6A—C). These re-
sults demonstrated that A-PSL@7BIO exerted potent neuro-
protective effects on brain neurons, effectively clearing 
extracellular Aß and restoring physiological function.
The hippocampus and cerebral cortex―two key brain regions 
governing learning, memory, and cognition―were analyzed via 
Western blotting to detect proteins associated with lysosomal 
membrane damage repair and acidification restoration in mouse 
brain neurons. The results revealed that A-PSL@7BIO, with 
enhanced brain-targeting ability and blood‒brain barrier perme-
ability, synergistically combined the effects of 7BIO and PS on 
damaged neuronal lysosomes. This combination potently sup-
pressed aberrant GSK-3ß phosphorylation, thereby increasing v-
ATPase activity, normalizing the phosphorylation levels of both 
GSK-3ß and v-ATPase to physiological ranges, and concurrently 
augmenting ATG2 expression. Collectively, these effects restored 
lysosomal homeostasis, enabling the conversion of CatD to 
mCatD (Fig. 6D—K). Overall, A-PSL@7BIO modulates lyso-
somal function by attenuating GSK-3ß phosphorylation and 
modulating ATG2 expression, processes that promote the degra-
dation of misfolded APP/ß-CTF to mitigate AD pathology and 
suppress extracellular Aß deposition. Meanwhile, immunofluo-
rescence staining was used to label the lysosomal damage marker 
Galectin-3 and the lysosomal marker CTSD to investigate the 
effect of A-PSL@7BIO on lysosomal function restoration in vivo 
(Supporting Information Fig. S10). In conclusion, A-PSL@7BIO 
also exerts a robust effect on repairing lysosomal damage in vivo.
3.8.
The safety of A-PSL@7BIO
To further assess the in vivo biocompatibility of A-PSL@7BIO, 
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining and blood biochemistry 
tests were conducted on the mice. A-PSL@7BIO was adminis-
tered to healthy mice every other day at six consecutive doses, 
while the control group was given saline. The mice were
12 
Jiaqing Yin et al.
+ MODEL
Please cite this article as: Yin Jiaqing et al., Lysosomal membrane damage repair and acidification impairment restoration triggered by smart lipid 
nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease treatment, Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2026.06.036

Figure 5 
In vivo alleviation of neuron damage by A-PSL@7BIO. (A) Representative Nissl staining of the hippocampal region (DG, CA1, CA2, 
and CA3) (scale bar Z 40 μm). (B) Corresponding semi-quantification of Nissl staining of the hippocampal region (DG, CA1, CA2, and CA3. (C) 
Representative Nissl staining of the cortex (scale bar Z 40 μm). (D) Corresponding semi-quantification of Nissl staining of the corte. Data are 
presented as mean ± SD (n Z 3); *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001 vs. indicated; ns, P > 0.05.
Smart lipid nanoparticles restore lysosomal function in AD 
13
+ MODEL
Please cite this article as: Yin Jiaqing et al., Lysosomal membrane damage repair and acidification impairment restoration triggered by smart lipid 
nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease treatment, Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2026.06.036

Figure 6 
In vivo neuroprotective efficacy and mechanism of A-PSL@7BIO. (A) Representative immunofluorescence images of Aß, DAPI and 
NeuN staining in the hippocampus and cortex of APP/PS1-21 mice after treatment with different formulations (scale bar Z 80 μm). (B) Cor-
responding semi-quantification of immunofluorescence images of Aß, DAPI, and NeuN staining in the hippocampus. (C) and cortex of APP/PS1-
21 mice after treatment with different formulations. (D) Western blotting analysis of ß-Amyloid, ATG2A, V0a1, pGSK-3ß, CatD, mCatD, and 
GAPDH proteins in the cortex (E) and hippocampus of APP/PS1-21 mice after treatment with different formulations. Corresponding semi-
quantification of Western blotting detection of the ß-Amyloid (F), ATG2A (G), V0a1 (H), pGSK-3ß (I), CatD (J), mCatD (K) proteins in the 
hippocampus and cortex of APP/PS1-21 mice after treatment with different formulations. Data are presented as mean ± SD (n Z 3); *P < 0.05, 
**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001, and ****P < 0.0001 vs. indicated; ns, P > 0.05.
14 
Jiaqing Yin et al.
+ MODEL
Please cite this article as: Yin Jiaqing et al., Lysosomal membrane damage repair and acidification impairment restoration triggered by smart lipid 
nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease treatment, Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2026.06.036

subsequently euthanized, followed by systematic collection of 
blood and organ samples for comprehensive safety assessment. 
Compared with the saline group, the A-PSL@7BIO group 
exhibited no significant pathological changes (Fig. 7A). 
Biochemical analyses of blood revealed that the serum ALT, AST, 
BUN, and CREA levels in the A-PSL@7BIO group were not 
significantly different from those in the saline group and fell 
within the normal range, indicating the absence of liver or kidney 
toxicity (Fig. 7A and B). The cumulative safety data collectively 
confirmed that A-PSL@7BIO exhibited excellent in vivo 
biocompatibility and safety profiles, with no adverse pathological 
or biochemical alterations observed.
4. Conclusions
On the basis of the key role of lysosomal dysfunction in AD pa-
thology, a brain-targeting, stimuli-responsive drug codelivery 
system (designated A-PSL@7BIO) was developed to address both 
lysosomal membrane damage and acidification impairment. The 
system was effectively delivered to the brain via ANG2-mediated 
brain targeting, thereby restoring neuronal lysosomal function, 
reducing Aß deposition, and improving cognitive function in AD 
model mice. Overall, the A-PSL@7BIO system represents a po-
tential dual-action therapeutic strategy that simultaneously targets 
lysosomal membrane repair and acidification restoration to miti-
gate neuronal lysosomal dysfunction in AD.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the National Natural Science Foun-
dation of China (Nos. 82473862 and 82304414, China), Jiangsu 
Young Science and Technology Talent Support Program (No. JSTJ-
2025-107, China), Top Talent Support Program for young and 
middle-aged people of Wuxi Health Committee (No. HB2023103, 
China), Wuxi Young Science and Technology Talent Support Pro-
gram (No. TJXD-2024-107, China), WJPMF Research Special 
Fund (No. 320.6750.2025-26-6, China), Basic Research Program of 
Jiangsu (No. BM2024001, China) and Key Research Project of 
Wuxi Medical Center (No. WXKY202403003, China).
Author contributions
Jiaqing Yin: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, 
Methodology, Writing - original draft, Visualization. Wei Lv: 
Formal analysis, Funding acquisition, Writing - review and edit-
ing. Wei Zhao: Software, Investigation. Zhenwei Ding: Formal 
analysis, Investigation. Fei Zhu: Data curation, Formal analysis. 
Hongli Liu: Investigation. Shengnan Li: Investigation. Xiang Cao: 
Conceptualization. Linfeng Liu: Investigation. Kefan Song: Re-
sources. Yue Gong: Resources. Jiangna Xu: Resources. Yuqin 
Chen: Resources. Zhiyuan Zhang: Project administration, Super-
vision, Writing - review and editing. Xiangming Fang: Project 
administration, Supervision, Writing - review and editing.
Figure 7 
Biosafety evaluation of A-PSL@7BIO. (A) Representative H&E-stained images of major organs from the mice in the saline group 
and A-PSL@7BIO group (scale bar Z 100 μm). (B) Evaluation of ALT, AST, BUN, and CREA levels after treatment with saline or 
A-PSL@7BIO. Data are presented as mean ± SD (n Z 3); vs. indicated; ns, P > 0.05.
Smart lipid nanoparticles restore lysosomal function in AD 
15
+ MODEL
Please cite this article as: Yin Jiaqing et al., Lysosomal membrane damage repair and acidification impairment restoration triggered by smart lipid 
nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease treatment, Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2026.06.036

Hongliang Xin: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Re-
sources, Project administration, Supervision, Data curation, 
Writing - review and editing.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Appendix A. Supporting information
Supporting information to this article can be found online at 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2026.06.036.
References
1. 2023 Alzheimer’s disease facts and figures. Alzheimer’s Dement 2023; 
19:1598—695.
2. Long JM, Holtzman DM. Alzheimer disease: an update on pathobi-
ology and treatment strategies. Cell 2019;179:312—39.
3. Barrera-Ocampo A. Monoclonal antibodies and aptamers: the future 
therapeutics for Alzheimer’s disease. Acta Pharm Sin B 2024;14: 
2795—814.
4. Johannesson M, So¨derberg L, Zachrisson O, Fritz N, Kylefjord H, 
Gkanatsiou E, et al. Lecanemab demonstrates highly selective binding 
to Aß protofibrils isolated from Alzheimer’s disease brains. Mol Cell 
Neurosci 2024;130:103949.
5. Wang W, Zhou Q, Jiang T, Li S, Ye J, Zheng J, et al. A novel small-
molecule PROTAC selectively promotes tau clearance to improve 
cognitive functions in alzheimer-like models. Theranostics 2021;11: 
5279—95.
6. Jang Y, Choi J, Park B, Park JY, Lee JH, Goo J, et al. Activatable 
PROTAC nanoassembly for photodynamic PTP1B proteolysis en-
hances glioblastoma immunotherapy. Acta Pharm Sin B 2025;15: 
4886—99.
7. Manc¸ano ASF, Pina JG, Froes BR, Sciani JM. Autophagy—lysosomal 
pathway impairment and cathepsin dysregulation in Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. Front Mol Biosci 2024;11:1490275.
8. Komatsu M, Waguri S, Chiba T, Murata S, Iwata JI, Tanida I, et al.
Loss of autophagy in the central nervous system causes neuro-
degeneration in mice. Nature 2006;441:880—4.
9. Pu J, Guardia CM, Keren-Kaplan T, Bonifacino JS. Mechanisms and 
functions of lysosome positioning. J Cell Sci 2016;129:4329—39.
10. Saftig P, Klumperman J. Lysosome biogenesis and lysosomal mem-
brane proteins: trafficking meets function. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 
2009;10:623—35.
11. Platt FM, d’Azzo A, Davidson BL, Neufeld EF, Tifft CJ. Lysosomal 
storage diseases. Nat Rev Dis Primers 2018;4:27.
12. Skowyra ML, Schlesinger PH, Naismith TV, Hanson PI. Triggered 
recruitment of ESCRT machinery promotes endolysosomal repair. 
Science 2018;360. eaar5078.
13. Deng M, Zhou H, Liang Z, Li Z, Wang Y, Guo W, et al. Development 
of lanzyme as the potential enzyme replacement therapy drug for fabry 
disease. Biomolecules 2022;13:53.
14. Porto C, Cardone M, Fontana F, Rossi B, Tuzzi MR, Tarallo A, et al.
The pharmacological chaperone N-butyldeoxynojirimycin enhances 
enzyme replacement therapy in pompe disease fibroblasts. Mol Ther 
2009;17:964—71.
15. Kumar G, Thakur V, Sardana S, Tiwari V, Sharma D, Kumar A.
Contemporary trends in targeted protein degradation for neurodegen-
erative diseases. Eur J Med Chem 2025;300:118110.
16. Xun J, Tan JX. Lysosomal repair in health and disease. J Cell Physiol 
2025;240:e70044.
17. Jia J, Claude-Taupin A, Gu Y, Choi SW, Peters R, Bissa B, et al.
Galectin-3 coordinates a cellular system for lysosomal repair and 
removal. Dev Cell 2020;52:69—87.e8.
18. Avrahami L, Farfara D, Shaham-Kol M, Vassar R, Frenkel D, Eldar-
Finkelman H. Inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3 ameliorates 
ß-Amyloid pathology and restores lysosomal acidification and 
mammalian target of rapamycin activity in the Alzheimer disease 
mouse model: in vivo and in vitro studys. J Biol Chem 2013;288: 
1295—306.
19. Jiang Y, Sato Y, Im E, Berg M, Bordi M, Darji S, et al. Lysosomal 
dysfunction in Down syndrome is APP-dependent and mediated by 
APP-ßCTF (C99). J Neurosci 2019;39:5255—68.
20. Lee JH, Yang DS, Goulbourne CN, Im E, Stavrides P, Pensalfini A, 
et al. Faulty autolysosome acidification in Alzheimer’s disease mouse 
models induces autophagic build-up of Aß in neurons, yielding senile 
plaques. Nat Neurosci 2022;25:688—701.
21. Mathuram TL. GSK-3: an "ace" among kinases. Cancer Biother 
Radiopharm 2024;39:619—31.
22. Lauretti E, Dincer O, Pratico` D. Glycogen synthase kinase-3 signaling 
in Alzheimer’s disease. Biochim Biophys Acta Mol Cell Res 2020; 
1867:118664.
23. Williamson WR, Wang D, Haberman AS, Hiesinger PR. A dual 
function of V0-ATPase a1 provides an endolysosomal degradation 
mechanism in Drosophila melanogaster photoreceptors. J Cell Biol 
2010;189:885—99.
24. Pal D, Mukherjee S, Song IH, Nimse SB. GSK-3 inhibitors: a new 
class of drugs for Alzheimer’s disease treatment. Curr Drug Targets 
2021;22:1725—37.
25. Chang L, Cui W, Yang Y, Xu S, Zhou W, Fu H, et al. Protection against 
ß-amyloid-induced synaptic and memory impairments via altering ß- 
amyloid assembly by bis(heptyl)-cognitin. Sci Rep 2015;5:10256.
26. Chen L, Huang C, Shentu J, Wang M, Yan S, Zhou F, et al. Indirubin 
derivative 7-bromoindirubin-3-oxime (7Bio) attenuates Aß oligomer-
induced cognitive impairments in mice. Front Mol Neurosci 2017;10:393.
27. Ferrari V, Tedesco B, Cozzi M, Chierichetti M, Casarotto E, 
Pramaggiore P, et al. Lysosome quality control in health and neuro-
degenerative diseases. Cell Mol Biol Lett 2024;29:116.
28. Meyer H, Kravic B. The endo-lysosomal damage response. Annu Rev 
Biochem 2024;93:367—87.
29. Tan JX, Finkel T. A phosphoinositide signalling pathway mediates 
rapid lysosomal repair. Nature 2022;609:815—21.
30. Sweeney MD, Zhao Z, Montagne A, Nelson AR, Zlokovic BV.
Blood—brain barrier: from physiology to disease and back. Physiol 
Rev 2019;99:21—78.
31. Habib S, Singh M. Angiopep-2-modified nanoparticles for brain-
directed delivery of therapeutics: a review. Polymers 2022;14:712.
32. Xin H, Sha X, Jiang X, Chen L, Law K, Gu J, et al. The brain targeting 
mechanism of Angiopep-conjugated poly(ethylene glycol)-co-poly(ε- 
caprolactone) nanoparticles. Biomaterials 2012;33:1673—81.
33. Xin H, Sha X, Jiang X, Zhang W, Chen L, Fang X. Anti-glioblastoma 
efficacy and safety of paclitaxel-loading Angiopep-conjugated dual 
targeting PEG-PCL nanoparticles. Biomaterials 2012;33:8167—76.
34. Taupin P. A dual activity of ROS and oxidative stress on adult neu-
rogenesis and Alzheimer’s disease. Cent Nerv Syst Agents Med Chem 
2010;10:16—21.
35. Wang J, Shangguan P, Chen X, Zhong Y, Lin M, He M, et al. A one-
two punch targeting reactive oxygen species and fibril for rescuing 
Alzheimer’s disease. Nat Commun 2024;15:705.
36. Liu B, Thayumanavan S. Mechanistic investigation on oxidative 
degradation of ROS-responsive thioacetal/thioketal moieties and their 
implications. Cell Rep Phy Sci 2020;1:100271.
37. Li Y, Yang P, Meng R, Xu S, Zhou L, Qian K, et al. Multidimensional 
autophagy nano-regulator boosts Alzheimer’s disease treatment by 
improving both extra/intraneuronal homeostasis. Acta Pharm Sin B 
2024;14:1380—99.
38. Chen YP, Chou CM, Chang TY, Ting H, Dembe´le´ J, Chu YT, et al.
Bridging size and charge effects of mesoporous silica nanoparticles for 
crossing the blood-brain barrier. Front Chem 2022;10:931584.
39. Fro¨hlich E. The role of surface charge in cellular uptake and cyto-
toxicity of medical nanoparticles. Int J Nanomedicine 2012;7: 
5577—91.
16 
Jiaqing Yin et al.
+ MODEL
Please cite this article as: Yin Jiaqing et al., Lysosomal membrane damage repair and acidification impairment restoration triggered by smart lipid 
nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease treatment, Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2026.06.036

40. Gao LJ, Li P, Ma T, Zhong ZQ, Xu SJ. Ligustilide alleviates 
neurotoxicity in SH-SY5Y cells induced by Aß(25—35) via regu-
lating endoplasmic reticulum stress and autophagy. Phytother Res 
2021;35:1572—84.
41. He X, Yuan W, Li Z, Hou Y, Liu F, Feng J. 6-Hydroxydopamine in-
duces autophagic flux dysfunction by impairing transcription factor 
EB activation and lysosomal function in dopaminergic neurons and 
SH-SY5Y cells. Toxicol Lett 2018;283:58—68.
42. Ma Z, Wang C, Liu C, Yan DY, Deng Y, Liu W, et al. The role S-
nitrosylation in manganese-induced autophagy dysregulation in SH-
SY5Y cells. Environ Toxicol 2017;32:2428—39.
43. Zhang H, Lu J, Liu H, Guan L, Xu S, Wang Z, et al. Ajugol enhances 
TFEB-mediated lysosome biogenesis and lipophagy to alleviate non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease. Pharmacol Res 2021;174:105964.
44. Lee JH, Nixon RA. Autolysosomal acidification failure as a primary driver 
of Alzheimer disease pathogenesis. Autophagy 2022;18:2763—4.
Smart lipid nanoparticles restore lysosomal function in AD 
17
+ MODEL
Please cite this article as: Yin Jiaqing et al., Lysosomal membrane damage repair and acidification impairment restoration triggered by smart lipid 
nanoparticles for Alzheimer’s disease treatment, Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsb.2026.06.036